# References — 1809.10945v1



1 M. Adamaszek and J. Stacho. Complexity of simplicial homology and independence complexes of chordal graphs. Computational Geometry: Theory and Applications , 57:8–18, 2016.

2 D. Attali, A. Lieutier, and D. Salinas. Efficient data structure for representing and simplifying simplicial complexes in high dimensions. International Journal of Computational Geometry and Applications (IJCGA) , 22:279–303, 2012.

3 J. A. Barmak and E. G. Minian. Strong homotopy types, nerves and collapses. Discrete and Computational Geometry , 47:301–328, 2012.

4 U. Bauer, M. Kerber, and J. Reininghaus. Clear and compress: Computing persistent homology in chunks. In Topological Methods in Data Analysis and Visualization III, Mathematics and Visualization , pages 103–117. 2014.



5 Jean-Daniel Boissonnat, C. S. Karthik, and Sébastien Tavenas. Building efficient and compact data structures for simplicial complexes. Algorithmica , 79:530–567, 2017.

6 Jean-Daniel Boissonnat and Karthik C. S. An efficient representation for filtrations of simplicial complexes. In ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA) , 2017.

7 M. Botnan and G Spreemann. Approximating persistent homology in euclidean space through collapses. In: Applicable Algebra in Engineering, Communication and Computing , 26:73–101.

8 Gunnar Carlsson and Vin de Silva. Zigzag persistence. Found Comput Math , 10, 2010.

9 Gunnar Carlsson, Vin de Silva, and Dmitriy Morozov. Zigzag persistent homology and real-valued functions. SOCG , pages 247–256, 2009.

10 Gunnar Carlsson, Tigran Ishkhanov, Vin de Silva, and Afra Zomorodian. On the local behavior of spaces of natural images. In: International Journal of Computer Vision , 76:1–12, 2008.

11 Joseph Minhow Chan, Gunnar Carlsson, and Raul Rabadan. Topology of viral evolution. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 110:18566–18571, 2013.

12 F. Chazal and S. Oudot. Towards persistence-based reconstruction in euclidean spaces. SOCG , 2008.

13 C. Chen and M. Kerber. Persistent homology computation with a twist. In European Workshop on Computational Geometry (EuroCG) , pages 197–200, 2011.

14 Aruni Choudhary, Michael Kerber, and Sharath Raghvendra:. In Polynomial-Sized Topological Approximations Using The Permutahedron . 32nd International Symposium on Computational Geometry (SoCG, 2016.

15 David Cohen-Steiner, Herbert Edelsbrunner, and John Harer. Stability of persistence diagrams. Discrete Comput. Geom , 37:103–120, 2007.

16 Datasets. URL: https://github.com/n-otter/PH-roadmap/’’ .

17 Vin de Silva and Robert Ghrist. Coverage in sensor networks via persistent homology. In: Algebraic and Geometric Topology , 7:339 – 358, 2007.

18 Harm Derksen and Jerzy Weyman. Quiver representations. Notices of the American Mathematical Society , 52(2):200–206, February 2005.

19 T. Dey, F. Fan, and Y. Wang. Computing topological persistence for simplicial maps. In Symposium on Computational Geometry (SoCG , pages 345–354, 2014.

20 T. K. Dey, H. Edelsbrunner, S. Guha, and D. Nekhayev. Topology preserving edge contraction. Publications de l’Institut Mathematique (Beograd) , 60:23–45, 1999.

21 Tamal Dey, Dayu Shi, and Yusu Wang. SimBa: An efficient tool for approximating Ripsfiltration persistence via Simplicial Batch-collapse . In European Symp. on Algorithms (ESA), pages 35:1–35:16, 2016.

22 Dionysus. URL: http://www.mrzv.org/software/dionysus/ .

23 C. H. Dowker. Homology groups of relations. The Annals of Mathematics , 56:84–95, 1952.

24 P. Dłotko and H. Wagner. Simplification of complexes for persistent homology computations,. Homology, Homotopy and Applications , 16:49–63, 2014.

25 H. Edelsbrunner, D. Letscher, and A. Zomorodian. Topological persistence and simplification. Discrete Comput. Geom , 28:511–533, 2002.

26 Herbert Edelsbrunner and John Harer. Computational Topology: An Introduction . American Mathematical Society, 2010.

27 Brittany Terese Fasy, Jisu Kim, Fabrizio Lecci, and Clément Maria:. Introduction to the r package tda. CoRR abs/1411.1830 , 2014.

28 François Le Gall. Powers of tensors and fast matrix multiplication. ISSAC ’ , 14:296–303, 2014.

29 Gudhi: Geometry understanding in higher dimensions. URL: http://gudhi.gforge. inria.fr/ .



30 A. Hatcher. Algebraic Topology . Univ. Press Cambridge, 2001.

31 Michael Kerber and Hannah Schreiber:. Barcodes of towers and a streaming algorithm for persistent homology. 33rd International Symposium on Computational Geometry , 2017. arXiv:1701.02208 .

32 Michael Kerber and R. Sharathkumar. Approximate cech complex in low and high dimensions. In Algorithms and Computation , pages 666–676. by Leizhen Cai, Siu-Wing Cheng, and Tak-Wah Lam. Vol. 8283. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 2013.

33 C. Maria and S. Oudot. Zigzag persistence via reflections and transpositions. In Proc. ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA) pp . 181–199, January 2015.

34 Nikola Milosavljevic, Dmitriy Morozov, and Primoz Skraba. Zigzag persistent homology in matrix multiplication time. In Symposium on Computational Geometry (SoCG) , 2011.

35 K. Mischaikow and V. Nanda. Morse theory for filtrations and efficient computation of persistent homology. DCG , 50:330–353, September 2013.

36 J. Munkres. Elements of Algebraic Topology . Perseus Publishing, 1984.

37 N. Otter, M. Porter, U. Tillmann, P. Grindrod, and H. Harrington. A roadmap for the computation of persistent homology. EPJ Data Science, Springer Nature , page 6:17, 2017.

38 Jose Perea and Gunnar Carlsson. A klein-bottle-based dictionary for texture representation. In: International Journal of Computer Vision , 107:75–97, 2014.

39 Ripser. URL: https://github.com/Ripser/ripser .

40 Donald Sheehy. Linear-size approximations to the vietoris–rips filtration. Discrete and Computational Geometry , 49:778–796, 2013.

41 Sophia. URL: https://bitbucket.org/schreiberh/sophia/ .

42 M. Tancer. Recognition of collapsible complexes is np-complete. Discrete and Computational Geometry , 55:21–38, 2016.

43 J.Reininghausc U. Bauer, M. Kerber and Hagner:. Phat – persistent homology algorithms toolbox. Journal of Symbolic Computation , 78, 2017.

44 J. H. C Whitehead. Simplicial spaces nuclei and m-groups. Proc. London Math. Soc , 45:243–327, 1939.

45 A. C. Wilkerson, H. Chintakunta, and H. Krim. Computing persistent features in big data: A distributed dimension reduction approach. ICASSP Proceedings , pages 11–15, 2014.

46 A. C. Wilkerson, T. J. Moore, A. Swami, and A. H. Krim. Simplifying the homology of networks via strong collapses . ICASSP Proceedings, 2013.

47 A. Zomorodian and G. Carlsson. Computing persistent homology. Discrete Comput. Geom , 33:249–274, 2005.

48 Afra Zomorodian. The tidy set: A minimal simplicial set for computing homology of clique complexes. In Proceedings of the Twenty-sixth Annual Symposium on Computational Geometry , pages 257–266, SoCG’10. Snowbird, Utah, USA . isbn, 2010.

