# References — 2105.03629v2

[1] Ulrich Bauer. Ripser: efficient computation of Vietoris-Rips persistence barcodes. Journal of Applied and Computational Topology , 5:391–423, 2021.

[2] Jeff Bezanson, Alan Edelman, Stefan Karpinski, and Viral B Shah. Julia: A fresh approach to numerical computing. SIAM review , 59(1):65–98, 2017.

[3] Joseph Minhow Chan, Gunnar Carlsson, and Raul Rabadan. Topology of viral evolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 110(46):18566–18571, 2013.

[4] Chao Chen and Daniel Freedman. Hardness results for homology localization. In Proceedings of the Twenty-First Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms , SODA ’10, pages 1594–1604, USA, 2010. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.

[5] Chao Chen and Michael Kerber. Persistent homology computation with a twist. In Proceedings 27th European Workshop on Computational Geometry , volume 11, pages 197–200, 2011.

[6] Matija Čufar. Ripserer.jl: flexible and efficient persistent homology computation in Julia. Journal of Open Source Software , 5(54):2614, 2020.

[7] Vin De Silva, Dmitriy Morozov, and Mikael Vejdemo-Johansson. Dualities in persistent (co)homology. Inverse Problems , 27(12):124003, 2011.

[8] Vin de Silva, Dmitriy Morozov, and Mikael Vejdemo-Johansson. Persistent cohomology and circular coordinates. Discrete & Computational Geometry , 45(4):737–759, 2011.

[9] Tamal K. Dey, Anil N. Hirani, and Bala Krishnamoorthy. Optimal homologous cycles, total unimodularity, and linear programming. SIAM Journal on Computing , 40(4):1026–1044, 2011.

[10] Tamal K. Dey, Tao Hou, and Sayan Mandal. Persistent 1-cycles: Definition, computation, and its application. In Rebeca Marfil, Mariletty Calderón, Fernando Díaz del Río, Pedro Real, and Antonio Bandera, editors, Computational Topology in Image Context , pages 123–136, Cham, 2019. Springer International Publishing.

[11] Edelsbrunner, Letscher, and Zomorodian. Topological persistence and simplification. Discrete & Computational Geometry , 28(4):511–533, 2002.

[12] Herbert Edelsbrunner and John Harer. Computational Topology an Introduction . American Mathematical Society, 2010.



[13] Emerson G. Escolar and Yasuaki Hiraoka. Optimal cycles for persistent homology via linear programming. In Katsuki Fujisawa, Yuji Shinano, and Hayato Waki, editors, Optimization in the Real World , pages 79–96, Tokyo, 2016. Springer Japan.

[14] Allen Hatcher. Algebraic topology . Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2000.

[15] Gregory Henselman and Robert Ghrist. Matroid filtrations and computational persistent homology. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.00199 , 2016.

[16] Matthew Kahle. Random geometric complexes. Discrete & Computational Geometry , 45:553–573, 2011.

[17] Dmitry N. Kozlov. A combinatorial method to compute explicit homology cycles using discrete Morse theory. Journal of Applied and Computational Topology , 4(1):79–100, 2020.

[18] Ippei Obayashi. Volume-optimal cycle: Tightest representative cycle of a generator in persistent homology. SIAM J. Appl. Algebra Geom. , 2(4):508–534, 2018.

[19] Nina Otter, Mason A Porter, Ulrike Tillmann, Peter Grindrod, and Heather A Harrington. A roadmap for the computation of persistent homology. EPJ Data Science , 6(1):17, 2017.

[20] Giovanni Petri, Martina Scolamiero, Irene Donato, and Francesco Vaccarino. Topological strata of weighted complex networks. PloS one , 8(6):e66506, 2013.

NZ Institute for Advanced Study, Massey University, Auckland, New Zealand Email address : matijacufar@gmail.com University of Ljubljana and Institute IMFM, Ljubljana, Slovenia Email address : ziga.virk@fri.uni-lj.si

