# References — CDSM2009

Multidimensional Scaling. Encyclopedia of Measurement and Statistics, 598–605, Sage, 2007.

[2] Gunnar Carlsson. Topology and Data. Available at http://comptop.stanford.edu, 2008.

- [3] Gunnar Carlsson and Vin de Silva. Zigzag Persistence. Manuscript, Stanford University, 2008. arXiv:0812.0197v1 [cs.CG]
- [4] Fr ´ ed ´ eric Chazal, David Cohen-Steiner, Marc Glisse, Leonidas J. Guibas, and Steve Y. Oudot. Proximity of Persistence Modules and their Diagrams. To appear in Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Computational Geometry, 2009.


- [5] Fr ´ ed ´ eric Chazal, Leonidas J. Guibas, Steve Y. Oudot, and Primoz Skraba. Analysis of Scalar Fields over Point Cloud Data. Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 1021–1030, New York, NY, 2009.
- [6] David Cohen-Steiner, Herbert Edelsbrunner, and John Harer. Stability of Persistence Diagrams. Discrete and Computational Geometry, 37 :103–120, 2007.
- [7] David Cohen-Steiner, Herbert Edelsbrunner, and John Harer. Extending Persistence Using Poincaré and Lefschetz Duality. Foundations of Computational Mathematics, 8 :79–103, 2009.


- [8] David Cohen-Steiner, Herbert Edelsbrunner, John Harer, and Dmitriy Morozov. Persistent Homology for Kernels, Images, and Cokernels. Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 1011–1020, New York, NY, 2009.
- [9] David Cohen-Steiner, Herbert Edelsbrunner, and Dmitriy Morozov. Vines and Vineyards by Updating Persistence in Linear Time. Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Computational Geometry, pages 119–126, New York, NY, 2006.


- [10] Tamal K. Dey and Rephael Wenger. Stability of Critical Points with Interval Persistence. Discrete and Computational Geometry, 38 :479–512, 2007.
- [11] Herbert Edelsbrunner, David Letscher, and Afra Zomorodian. Topological Persistence and Simplification. Discrete and Computational Geometry, 28 :511–533, 2002.


[12] Peter Gabriel. Unzerlegbare Darstellungen I. Manuscripta Mathematica, 6 :71–103, 1972.

[13] John A. Hartigan. Clustering Algorithms. J. Wiley and sons, 1975.

[14] Allen Hatcher. Algebraic Topology. Cambridge University Press, 2002.

[15] Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Vin de Silva, and John C. Langford. A Global Geometric Framework for Nonlinear Dimensionality Reduction. Science, 290 (5500):2319–2323, 2000.

[16] Afra Zomorodian and Gunnar Carlsson. Computing Persistent Homology. Discrete and Computational Geometry, 33 (2):249–274, 2005.
