# References — KGW2026

- [1] Dong Chen, Jian Liu, Jie Wu, Guo-Wei Wei, Feng Pan, and Shing-Tung Yau. Path topology in molecular and materials sciences. The journal of physical chemistry letters, 14(4):954–964, 2023.
- [2] Samir Chowdhury and Facundo Me´moli. Persistent Path Homology of Directed Networks, pages 1152–1169.
- [3] Tamal K. Dey, Tianqi Li, and Yusu Wang. An efficient algorithm for 1-dimensional (persistent) path homology. Discrete & Computational Geometry, 68(4):1102–1132, 2022.
- [4] Hongsong Feng, Li Shen, Jian Liu, and Guo-Wei Wei. Mayer-homology learning prediction of protein-ligand binding affinities. Journal of computational biophysics and chemistry, 24(02):253–266, 2025.
- [5] Li Feng, Dengcheng Yang, Sinan Wu, Chengwen Xue, Mengmeng Sang, Xiang Liu, Jincan Che, Jie Wu, Claudia Gragnoli, Christopher Griffin, Chen Wang, Shing-Tung Yau, and Rongling Wu. Network modeling and topology of aging. Physics Reports, 1101:1–65, 2025. Network modeling and topology of aging.

- [6] Alexander Grigorian. Advances in path homology theory of digraphs. Notices of the International Consortium of Chinese Mathematicians, 10:61–124, 01 2022.
- [7] Alexander Grigorian, Yong Lin, Yuri Muranov, and Shing-Tung Yau. Homotopy theory for digraphs. Pure and Applied Mathematics Quarterly, 10, 07 2014.
- [8] Alexander Grigor’yan, Yong Lin, Yuri Muranov, and Shing-Tung Yau. Homologies of path complexes and digraphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1207.2834, 2012.
- [9] Alexander Grigor’yan, Yong Lin, Yuri Muranov, and Shing-Tung Yau. Path homology theory of digraphs and eilenberg–steenrod axioms. Pacific Journal of Mathematics, 270(1):95–128, 2014.
- [10] A. A. Grigor’yan, Yong Lin, Yu. V. Muranov, and Shing-Tung Yau. Path complexes and their homologies. Journal of Mathematical Sciences, 248(5):564–599, Jun 2020.
- [11] Mikhail Kapranov. On the q-analog of homological algebra. arXiv: Quantum Algebra, 1996.
- [12] Zhenzhi Li and Wujie Shen. $\partial$ -invariant path generators for digraphs, 2026.
- [13] Walther Mayer. A new homology theory. Annals of Mathematics, 43(2):370–380, 1942.
- [14] R. Milo, S. Shen-Orr, S. Itzkovitz, N. Kashtan, D. Chklovskii, and U. Alon. Network motifs: Simple building blocks of complex networks. Science, 298(5594):824–827, 2002.
- [15] Li Shen, Jian Liu, and Guo-Wei Wei. Persistent Mayer homology and persistent Mayer Laplacian. Foundations of Data Science, 6(4):584–612, 2024.
- [16] Edwin H. Spanier. The Mayer homology theory. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 55(2):102 – 112, 1949.
- [17] Akaki Tikaradze. Homological constructions on n-complexes. Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra, 176(2):213–222, 2002.
- [18] Quang Truong and Peter Chin. Weisfeiler and lehman go paths: learning topological features via path complexes. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Eighth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Thirty-Sixth Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence and Fourteenth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, AAAI’24/IAAI’24/EAAI’24. AAAI Press, 2024.
- [19] Rui Wang and Guo-Wei Wei. Persistent path Laplacian. Foundations of Data Science, 5(1):26– 55, 2023.
- [20] Shuang Wu, Xiang Liu, Ang Dong, Claudia Gragnoli, Christopher Griffin, Jie Wu, Shing-Tung Yau, and Rongling Wu. The metabolomic physics of complex diseases. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 120(42):e2308496120, 2023.
