# References — MMO2019

Adams, H., Emerson, T., Kirby, M., Neville, R., Peterson, C., Shipman, P., Chepushtanova, S., Hanson, E., Motta, F., and Ziegelmeier, L. (2015). Persistence images: A stable vector representation of persistent homology The Journal of Machine Learning Research 18(1):218–252.

Adcock, A., Carlsson, E., and Carlsson, G. (2016). The ring of algebraic functions on persistence bar codes. Homology, Homotopy and Applications , 18(1):381–402.

Adler, R. J., Bobrowski, O., Borman, M. S., Subag, E., and Weinberger, S. (2010). Persistent homology for random fields and complexes. In Borrowing strength: theory powering applications–a Festschrift for Lawrence D. Brown (pp. 124–143). Institute of Mathematical Sciences.

Adler, R. J., Bobrowski, O., and Weinberger, S. (2014). Crackle: The homology of noise. Discrete & Computational Geometry , 52(4):680–704.

Adler, R. J., Agami, S., and Pranav, P. (2017). Modeling and replicating statistical topology, and evidence for CMB non-homogeneity. arXiv:1704.08248 .

Atienza, N., Gonzalez-Diaz, R., and Rucco, M. (2016). Separating topological noise from features using persistent entropy. In Federation of International Conferences on Software Technologies: Applications and Foundations (pp. 3–12). Springer International Publishing.

Bauer, U. (2015). Ripser. https://github.com/Ripser/ripser.

Bendich, P., Marron, J. S., Miller, E., Pieloch, A., and Skwerer, S. (2016). Persistent homology analysis of brain artery trees. The Annals of Applied Statistics , 10(1):198–218.

Bobrowski, O., Mukherjee, S., and Taylor, J. E. (2014). Topological consistency via kernel estimation. arXiv:1407.5272 .

Boothe, D., Yu, A., Kudela, P., Anderson, W., Vettel, J., and Franaszczuk, P. (2017). Impact of neuronal membrane damage on local field potential in large-scale simulation of cerebral cortex. Frontiers in Neurology , volume 8, pages 236

Bubenik, P. (2015). Statistical topological data analysis using persistence landscapes. The Journal of Machine Learning Research 16(1):77-102.

Chazal, F., Fasy, B., Lecci, F., Michel, B., Rinaldo, A., and Wasserman, L. (2015). Subsampling methods for persistent homology. In International Conference on Machine Learning (pp. 2143–2151).

Chazal, F. and Divol, V. (2018). The density of expected persistence diagrams and its kernel based estimation. In The Symposium of Computational Geometry 2018

Chen, C. and Kerber, M. (2011). Persistent homology computation with a twist. In Proceedings 27th European Workshop on Computational Geometry , volume 11.

Cohen-Steiner, D., Edelsbrunner, H., and Harer, J. (2007). Stability of persistence diagrams. Discrete Comput. Geom , 37:103–120.

Cohen-Steiner, D., Edelsbrunner, H., Harer, J., and Mileyko, Y. (2010). Lipschitz functions have l p-stable persistence. Foundations of computational mathematics , 10(2):127–139.

De Silva, V. and Ghrist, R. (2007). Coverage in sensor networks via persistent homology. Algebraic & Geometric Topology , 7(1):339–358.

Donato, I., Gori, M., Pettini, M., Petri, G., De Nigris, S., Franzosi, R., and Vaccarino, F. (2016). Persistent homology analysis of phase transitions. Physical Review E , 93(5), 052138.

Edelsbrunner, H. and Harer, J. (2010). Computational topology: an introduction . American Mathematical Society.

Edelsbrunner, H., Letscher, D., and Zomorodian, A. (2002). Topological persistence and simplification. Discrete and Computational Geometry , 28(4):511–533.

Edelsbrunner, H. (2013). Persistent homology in image processing. In International Workshop on Graph-Based Representations in Pattern Recognition , pages 182–183. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.

Emmett, K., Rosenbloom, D., Camara, P., and Rabadan, R. (2014). Parametric inference using persistence diagrams: A case study in population genetics. arXiv:1406.4582 .

Emrani, S., Gentimis, T., and Krim, H. (2014). Persistent homology of delay embeddings and its application to wheeze detection. IEEE Signal Processing Letters , 21(4):459–463.

Fasy, B. T., Kim, J., Lecci, F., Maria, C., Rouvreau., V., The included GUDHI is authored by Clement Maria, Dionysus by Dmitriy Morozov, P. b. U. B. M. K., and Reininghaus., J. (2015). Tda: Statistical tools for topological data analysis r package version 1.4.1.

Fasy, B. T., Lecci, F., Rinaldo, A., Wasserman, L., Balakrishnan, S., and Singh, A. (2014). Confidence sets for persistence diagrams. The Annals of Statistics , 42(6):2301–2339.

Franaszczuk, P. and Bilnowaska, K. Linear model of brainactivity-EEG as a superposition of damped oscillatory modes Biological Cybernetics 53:19-25 Spring-Verlag

Gelman, A., Carlin, J. B., Stern, H. S., and Rubin, D. B. (2014). Bayesian data analysis , volume 2. Chapman & Hall/CRC Boca Raton, FL, USA.

Goodman, I. R., Mahler, R. P., and Nguyen, H. T. (2013). Mathematics of data fusion , volume 37. Springer Science & Business Media.

Guillemard, M. and Iske, A. (2011). Signal filtering and persistent homology: an illustrative example. Proc. Sampling Theory and Applications (SampTA’11) .

Hatcher, A. (2002). Algebraic topology. 2002. Cambridge UP, Cambridge , 606(9).

Kerber, M., Morozov, D., and Nigmetov, A. (2016). Geometry helps to compare persistence diagrams. Proceedings of the Eighteenth Workshop on Algorithm Engineering and Experiments , pages 103–112.

Kilmesch, W. (2012). Alpha band oscillations, attention, and controlled access to stored information. Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 16(12):606-617

Kusano, G., Fukumizu, K., and Hiraoka, Y. (2016). Persistence weighted Gaussian kernel for topological data analysis. In Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine Learning .

Kwitt, R., Huber, S., Niethammer, M., Lin, W., and Bauer, U. Statistical topological data analysisa kernel perspective. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pages 3070–3078.

Mahler, R. P. (1995). Unified nonparametric data fusion. In SPIE’s 1995 Symposium on OE/Aerospace Sensing and Dual Use Photonics , pages 66–74. International Society for Optics and Photonics.

Mahler, R. P. (2003). Multi-target Bayes filtering via first-order multi-target moments. In IEEE Trans. AES , volume 37, pages 1152-1178.

Marchese, A. and Maroulas, V. (2016). Topological learning for acoustic signal identification. In Information Fusion (FUSION), 2016 19th International Conference on , pages 1377–1381.

Marchese, A. and Maroulas, V. (2018). Signal classification with a point process distance on the space of persistence diagrams. Advances in Data Analysis and Classification , 12 (3), pp. 657–682.

Marchese, A., Maroulas, V., and Mike, J. (2017). K-means clustering on the space of persistence diagrams. In Wavelets and Sparsity XVII (Vol. 10394, p. 103940W). International Society for Optics and Photonics.

Maroulas, V., Micucci, C., and Spannaus, A. (2018). A stable cardinality distance for topological classification. https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.01664.pdf

Maroulas, V., Nasrin, F., and Oballe, C. (2019). A Bayesian Framework for Persistent Homology https://arxiv.org/pdf/1901.02034.pdf

Matheron, G. (1975). Random Sets and Integral Geometry . John Wiley & Sons.

Mileyko, Y., Mukherjee, S., and Harer, J. (2011). Probability measures on the space of persistence diagrams. Inverse Problems , 27(12).

Munch, E. (2017). A user’s guide to topological data analysis Journal of Learning Analytics , 4(2):47–61.

Perea, J. A. and Harer, J. (2015). Sliding windows and persistence: An application of topological methods to signal analysis. Foundations of Computational Mathematics , 15(3):799–838.

Pereira, C. M. and de Mello, R. F. (2015). Persistent homology for time series and spatial data clustering. Expert Systems with Applications , 42(15):6026–6038.

Reininghaus, J., Huber, S., Bauer, S., and Kwitt, R. (2014). A stable multi-scale kernel for topological machine learning. arXiv:1412.6821

Repovs, G. (2010). Dealing with noise in EEG recording and data analysis. Informatica Medica Slovenica , 15(1):18-25

Scott, D. W. (2015). Multivariate density estimation: theory, practice, and visualization . John Wiley & Sons.

Seversky, L. M., Davis, S., and Berger, M. (2016). On time-series topological data analysis: New data and opportunities. The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 59–67.

Sgouralis, I., Nebenf ¨ uhr, A., and Maroulas, V. (2017). A Bayesian topological framework for the identification and reconstruction of subcellular motion. SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences , 10(2):871–899.

Silverman, B. W. (1986). Density estimation for statistics and data analysis (Vol. 26). . CRC press, New York.

Simard, R. and L’Ecuyer, P. (2011). Computing the two-sided Kolmogorov Smirnov distribution. Journal of Statistical Software 39(11):1-18

Turner, K., Mileyko, Y., Mukherjee, S., and Harer, J. (2014). Fr´echet means for distribution of persistence diagrams. Discrete & Computational Geometry , 52:44–70.

Venkataraman, V., Ramamurthy, K. N., and Turaga, P. (2016). Persistent homology of attractors for action recognition. In 2016 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP) , pages 4150–4154.

Xia, K., Feng, X., Tong, Y., and Wei, G. W. (2015). Persistent homology for the quantitative prediction of fullerene stability. Journal of computational chemistry , 36(6):408–422.

## Appendix A. Proofs from Section 4.3

## A.1. Proof of Proposition 38

Note that the lower bound integral is the probability for a pair z = ( x,y ) of independent standard normal variables to lie in B ((0 , 0) ,δ ). In order to bound the bottleneck distance W ∞ ( D, D ) < δσ , it is sufficient that each constituent feature does not stray too far from either its corresponding center or the diagonal (see Fig. 3 for reference). Specifically, we follow Def. 5 to build a correspondence between D and D so that the maximal distance undercuts δσ , and thus the (potentially smaller) bottleneck distance is also bounded by δσ . For clarity, features in D are denoted using ζ while features in D are denoted using ξ . j u

Consider each feature ξ j ∈ D u = D ∩{ d -b ≥ σ } and its associated random singleton diagram D j = { ζ j } or ∅ as in Def. 22. Assuming the disc neighborhood B j = B ( ξ j , δσ ) is contained in the wedge W = { ( b, d ) ∈ R 2 : d > b ≥ 0 } , the density of z j = ζ j -ξ j σ is a multiple ( > 1) of the density of the Gaussian random variable z ∼ N ((0 , 0) , I 2 ) in the region where ζ j ∈ B j (or equivalently z j ∈ B ((0 , 0) , δ )). Thus, we obtain P [ ζ j ∈ B ( ξ j , δσ ) ] ≥ P [ | z | ≤ δ ] for the probability that ζ j can be mapped to ξ j in a bounding correspondence. If B j glyph[notsubseteql] W , this probability is even higher because ξ j can be mapped to the diagonal and thus the case D j = ∅ is included.

∅ Now take into account the features in D and the associated random features D as in Def. 24. Although the features in D are not necessarily independent, we may assume without loss of generality the worst case, in which the maximal cardinality is drawn. Given a fixed cardinality, the draws of D are independent. Since any feature may be mapped to the diagonal in the bottleneck distance, a bounding correspondence can be obtained whenever the draws in D and features in D are close enough to the diagonal (within δσ ). Indeed, the features in D are by definition distance σ ≤ δσ from the diagonal. Restricting to W , the pdf for the draws of 2 2

D   = { ( b j ,d j ) } | N   | j =1 is given by p   ( b,d ) = 1 πN   σ 2   N   j =1 e −     x − b j + d j 2   +   y − b j + d j 2     / 2 σ 2 . Consider the sets U j = B    b j + d j 2 , b j + d j 2   ,δσ   and U =   N   j =1 U j . For each lower feature ( b,d ) ∈ D   , mapping to the diagonal yields a bounding correspondence and the associated probability is bounded below by P [ d − b ≤ δσ ] =   ∆ δσ 0 p   ( x,y ) dxdy ≥   W ∩U p   ( x,y ) dxdy since W ∩ U ⊂ ∆ δσ 0 = { ( b,d ) ∈ W : d − b ≤ δσ } . Next, we restrict the lower bounding integral for each term of p   to its matching subset U j and change variables to attain the desired form:

$$
\int _ { W \cap U } p ^ { \ell } ( x , y ) \, d x \, d y & \geq \sum _ { j = 1 } ^ { N _ { \ell } } \int _ { U _ { j } } \frac { 1 } { 2 \pi N _ { \ell } \sigma ^ { 2 } } e ^ { - \left ( \left ( x - \frac { b _ { j } + d _ { j } } { 2 } \right ) ^ { 2 } + \left ( y - \frac { b _ { j } + d _ { j } } { 2 } \right ) ^ { 2 } \right ) / 2 \sigma ^ { 2 } } \, d x \, d y \\ & = \int _ { B ( ( 0 , 0 ) , \delta ) } \frac { 1 } { 2 \pi } e ^ { - ( x ^ { 2 } + y ^ { 2 } ) / 2 } \, d x \, d y .
$$

Overall, this argument shows that with probability at least P ( | z | ≤ δ ) M there is a correspondence which bounds the bottleneck distance by δσ and the result follows.

## A.2. Proof of Lemma 39

Choose an arbitrary persistence diagram D . Since bottleneck distance is defined according to the sup-norm (see Eq. (2.2)), the bottleneck distance to the null persistence diagram (i.e., without any features) is precisely half the maximal persistence. Thus, we begin by showing that the maximal persistence moment is finite. Taking Z = { ξ 1 ,...,ξ N } with ξ i = ( b i ,d i ,k i ), we have:

$$
\int _ { \mathcal { W } _ { 0 \colon d - 1 } } \max ( d _ { i } - b _ { i } ) \delta Z \leq \int _ { \mathcal { W } _ { 0 \colon d - 1 } } \| Z \| \, f ( Z ) \delta Z
$$

since max( d i − b i ) ≤ max( ( b i ,d i ) ) ≤ Z . Consider a compact set K ⊂ W 0: − 1 which contains a neighborhood of the origin. Given assumptions ( A 2) ∗ and ( A 3) ∗ , Eq. (A.1) is bounded by the following finite expression.

$$
\int _ { \mathcal { W } _ { 0 ; d - 1 } } \| Z \| \, f ( Z ) \delta Z \leq \int _ { K } C _ { 2 } \, \| Z \| \, \delta Z + \sum _ { N = 1 } ^ { M } \int _ { h _ { N } ^ { - 1 } ( h _ { N } ( K ) ^ { c } ) } C _ { 3 } \, \| Z \| ^ { - 2 N - 1 } \, d \xi _ { 1 } \dots d \xi _ { N } .
$$

Lastly, we take advantage of the Minkowski inequality, which holds trivially for set integration since it is a linear combination of Lebesgue integrals. Indeed, the MAD centered at D 0 is bounded

$$
\int _ { \mathcal { W } _ { 0 ; d - 1 } } W _ { \infty } ( \mathcal { D } _ { 0 } , Z ) f ( Z ) \delta Z \leq \int _ { \mathcal { W } _ { 0 ; d - 1 } } W _ { \infty } ( \mathcal { D } _ { 0 } , \emptyset ) f ( Z ) \delta Z + \int _ { \mathcal { W } _ { 0 ; d - 1 } } W _ { \infty } ( \emptyset , Z ) f ( Z ) \delta Z \quad ( A . 3 )
$$

where ∅ represents the null persistence diagram and the distance to the null persistence diagram is precisely half the maximal persistence. Since f integrates to 1, the first integral simplifies to the finite distance W ∞ ( D 0 , ∅ ), while the second integral is finite according to Eq. (A.2).

## Appendix B. Extra Examples

Here we present two more examples of constructing a kernel density estimator (KDE) according to the kernel given in Eq. (4.6). In these examples, we view slices of the KDE at various sample sizes and bandwidths. In the first example, the underlying dataset consists of points sampled from a circle with relatively large noise, in contrast to Ex. 3 in Subsection 5. This example demonstrates how, despite the symmetry of the unit circle and Gaussian noise of the underlying data, the resulting persistence diagram KDE and eventually its limiting behavior lacks Gaussian structure. In the second example, the underlying dataset consists of points sampled from a pinched circle. The underlying dataset has only one loop, but the persistence diagrams typically have a feature of long persistence and another feature of moderate persistence. Both features are captured by the KDE, and are clearly separable into distinct features despite their adjacency. To keep the presentation relatively simple to interpret, the same slices will be presented for each KDE (see Rmk. 41). This allows one to track the convergence of the KDE as the sample size of persistence diagrams, n , increases and the bandwidth, σ , decreases.

Example 5 Consider random underlying datasets each consisting of 25 points sampled uniformly from the unit circle, which are then perturbed by Gaussian noise with variance (1 / 6) 2 I 2 , and their associated ˇ Cech persistence diagrams for degree of homology k = 1. An example dataset and its associated ˇ Cech persistence diagram for k = 1 are shown in Fig. 12.

Since the underlying datasets are sampled from a perfect circle perturbed by large noise, one expects the associated 1-homology to have a single persistent feature with several smaller features caused by noise. We consider several KDEs as we simultaneously increase the number of persistence diagrams and narrow the bandwidth. The bandwidth was chosen to vary according to Silverman’s rule of thumb (Silverman, 1986). Since the KDEs are defined on N W N for several input cardinalities N , we present ˆ f n,σ ( Z ) in multiple slices by fixing a cardinality and then fixing all but one input feature, as explained in Rmk. 41. For example, g ( ξ ) = ˆ f n,σ ( ξ,ξ 2 ,...,ξ N ) for fixed ξ j is a function on W and represents a slice of the local KDE on W N . This progression of KDEs can be seen in Fig. 13, wherein the same slices are viewed for each choice of n and σ . Modes of each slice are used as fixed features in the slices of higher cardinality inputs; consequently, the presented slices capture portions of the KDE with high probability density.

Fig. 13 demonstrates slower convergence of the KDEs than in Ex. 3, which is expected due to larger noise. Though the tail behavior of the KDEs remains Gaussian in nature, the limiting density is not Gaussian. In fact, the KDEs ˆ f ( n,σ ) are neither symmetric nor unimodal, even for a single input. Much like the kernel densities themselves, each KDE separates into upper and lower densities on W ; however, the lower density varies depending on which upper mode is fixed in ˆ f ( ξ,ξ j ).

1.0

0.5

0.0

0.5

=1.0

1.0

0.0

(a)

0.5

1.0

![The image is a scatter plot with a linear scale on the x-axis and a linear scale on the y-axis. The plot consists of four data points, each represented by a circle. The data points are scattered around the x-axis, with the x-axis ranging from 0 to 1.0. The data points are labeled as follows: - x: 0.8 - y: 0.5 - x: 0.6 - y: 0.4 The data points are scattered around the x-axis, with the x-axis ranging from 0.0 to 1.0. The data points are labeled as follows: - x: 0.8 - y: 0.5 - x: 0.6 - y: 0.4 The data points are scattered around the y-axis, with the y-axis ranging from 0.](<MMO2019/imageFile13.png>)

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2


0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Birth

(b)

Figure 12: (a) An example of the underlying datasets generated for Ex. 5. Each dataset consists of 25 points sampled uniformly on the unit circle which are then perturbed by i.i.d. Gaussian noise with variance (1 / 6) 2 I 2 . (b) The persistence diagram associated to the ˇ Cech filtration of the dataset

While the underlying dataspace is the unit circle in both Ex. 3 and Ex. 5, the precise presentation of the underlying data effects the pdf of the associated random persistence diagram. Precisely, two primary parameters for the underlying dataset are involved: (i) the scale of Gaussian noise and (ii) the sample size of the underlying dataset. The persistence diagram (for degree of homology k = 1) associated with the ‘’true’ unit circle is not random and has a single feature at ( b,d ) = (0 , 1). The random, discrete nature of these examples creates persistence diagrams which deviate from this ‘truth.’

As described for Ex. 3, with very little noise all the sample points lie close to the unit circle, and so the ˇ Cech complex becomes contractible at a radius r ≈ 1. Consequently, the death value of the main topological feature is near the ‘true’ value (e.g., the mode in Fig. 9 is d = 0 . 98 ≈ 1). However, since we are working with discrete points, this feature does not appear immediately: the gaps in the circle need to be filled in (this is even true without noise). In Ex. 3, the sample size is only 10, so the birth value is typically much larger than the ‘true’ value (e.g., the mode in Fig. 9 is b = 0 . 77 >> 0).

In comparison to Ex. 3, Ex. 5 has relatively more noise; this results in a random persistence diagram with smaller death values for the main feature (e.g., the mode in Fig. 13 is d = 0 . 8 < 0 . 98). It is evident from Fig. 13 that while the noise is additive on the underlying data, its precise effect on the random persistence diagram is nonlinear. Moreover, Ex. 5 has a larger sample size (25 as opposed to 10), resulting in more consistent and smaller birth times for the main feature (e.g., the mode in Fig. 13 is b = 0 . 4 < 0 . 77). In addition, larger noise and sample size both result in more features near the diagonal in Ex. 5 as compared to Ex. 3.

Example 6 While Ex. 5 demonstrates the effect of noise on a persistence diagram pdf, this example will look into the effect of geometry. Consider random underlying datasets each consisting

1.0

(1)

0.8

0.6

20.4

0.2

1.0

(2)

0.8

0.6

20.4

0.2

1.0

(3)

0.8

0.6

0.2

1.0

0.8

0.6-

20.4

0.2

1.Or

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.4

0.6

Birth

0.8

0.2

0.4

0.6

Birth

0.8

1.0

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Birth

![The image is a scatter plot graph with different colors and a scale labeled as death. The graph has a blue background with a white grid. There are two axes labeled birth and death. The x-axis is labeled birth and the y-axis is labeled death. The graph shows data points for different values of birth and death. The points are colored in different shades of blue, red, yellow, orange, and green. The graph is titled Death. ### Description of the Graph: 1. **X-Axis (Birth)**: - The x-axis is labeled birth. - The y-axis is labeled death. 2. **Y-Axis (Death)**: - The y-axis is labeled death. - The x-axis is labeled death. 3. **Data Points**: - There are two data points on the graph. - The first data point](<MMO2019/imageFile14.png>)

1.0

0.8

0.6

80.4

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Birth

1.0

0.8

0.6


0.2

0.2

0.4

0.6

Birth

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.4

Birth

0.8

1.0

0.8

0.6


0.4

0.2

1.0

0.8

0.6


0.4

0.2

0.2

0.4

0.6

Birth

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

Birth

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.4

Birth

0.8

Figure 13: Key slices of persistence diagram KDEs for Ex. 5. Each column is a particular slice, while each row is a particular KDE: (1) n = 20 and σ = 0 . 05, (2) n = 100 and σ = 0 . 03, and (3) n = 300 and σ = 0 . 02. The first column are the local KDEs ˆ f n,σ (( b,d )) evaluated at a diagram with only one feature. The second column are the local KDEs ˆ f n,σ (( b,d ) , (0 . 4 , 0 . 8)) evaluated at a diagram with two features but one feature fixed. The third column are the local KDEs ˆ f n,σ (( b,d ) , (0 . 56 , 0 . 8)) evaluated at a diagram with two features but with a different feature fixed. Overall, this figure demonstrates convergence of the KDE as the number of persistence diagrams increases and the bandwidth decreases. Indeed, the two modes on the left already stabilize after n = 300, and the spread is no longer determined by the kernel bandwidth.

1.0

0.5

0.0

0.5

=1.0

1.0

0.0

(a)

0.5

1.0

![The image is a scatter plot with two axes labeled Birth and Death. The x-axis represents the age in years, ranging from 0 to 10 years. The y-axis represents the number of deaths, ranging from 0 to 0.5. The plot shows a trend of decreasing deaths over time, with a sharp decline in the number of deaths between 0.5 and 0.5.](<MMO2019/imageFile15.png>)

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.


0.5


0.2

0.3

0.4


Birth

(b)

Figure 14: (a) An example of the underlying datasets generated for Ex. 5. Each dataset consists of 100 points sampled uniformly (according to angle) on the two-lobed polar curve which are then perturbed by i.i.d. Gaussian noise with variance (1 / 30) 2 I 2 . (b) The persistence diagram associated to the ˇ Cech filtration of the underlying dataset.

of 100 points sampled from a two-lobed polar curve, which are then perturbed by Gaussian noise with variance (1 / 30) 2 I 2 , and their associated ˇ Cech persistence diagrams for degree of homology k = 1. An example dataset and its associated persistence diagram for k = 1 are shown in Fig. 14.

We consider several KDEs as we simultaneously increase the number of persistence diagrams and narrow the bandwidth. The bandwidth was chosen to vary according to Silverman’s rule of thumb (Silverman, 1986). Since the KDEs are defined on N W N for several input cardinalities N , we present ˆ f n,σ ( Z ) in multiple slices by fixing a cardinality and then fixing all but one input feature, as explained in Rmk. 41. For example, g ( ξ ) = ˆ f n,σ ( ξ,ξ 2 ,...,ξ N ) for fixed ξ j is a function on W and represents a slice of the local KDE on W N . This progression of KDEs can be seen in Fig. 15, wherein the same slices are viewed for each choice of n and σ . Modes of each slice are used as fixed features in the slices of higher cardinality inputs; consequently, the presented slices capture portions of the KDE with high probability density. Moreover, Fig. 15 demonstrates that these slices tend to capture specific topological or geometric features of the underlying dataspace.

0.5

(1)

0.3

20.2

(2)


0.1

0.3

Birth

0.4

0.5

0.1

0.3

0.2

Birth

0.4

0.5

0.3

20.2

0.3

0.1

0 Birtho3

0.4

0.5


0.3

0.1

0.2

0.3

Birth

0.4

0.5

0.5

(3)

0.5

(4)

0.1

0.1

0.2

0.3

Birth

0.3

0.2

Birth

0.4

0.4

0.5

0.5

0.Zirtho

0.1

0.3

0.4

0.5

![The image is a graph with a title Birth and a legend with different colors. The graph consists of several lines and points, each representing a different birth event. The x-axis is labeled Birth and the y-axis is labeled Dewert. The graph is drawn with a white line, and the points are colored in different colors. The points are labeled with numbers, and the legend is also colored in different colors. Here is a detailed description of the graph: ### Graph Description: 1. **Title**: Birth 2. **Legend**: - The legend is colored in different colors: - Blue: Birth - Orange: Birth - Red: Birth - Green: Birth - Yellow: Birth - Purple: Birth - Blue: Birth - Orange: Birth - Red: Birth - Green: Birth - Yellow: Birth - Purple: Birth - Blue: Birth -](<MMO2019/imageFile16.png>)

0.5

0.3

20.2

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Birth


0.1

0.4

0.5

0.5

0.1

0.2

0.3

Birth

0.4

0.5

0.5

0.1

0.2

0.3

Birth

0.4

0.5


0.5

0.1

0.3

0.2

Birth

0.4

0.5

;


0.1

0.2

0.3

Birth

0.4

0.5

0.1

0.2

0.3

Birth

0.4

0.5

0.1

0.3

Birth

0.4

0.1

0.3

0.2

Birth

0.4

0.5

Figure 15: Key slices of persistence diagram KDEs for Ex. 6. Each column is a particular slice, while each row is a particular KDE (1) n = 20 and σ = 0 . 03, (2) n = 100 and σ = 0 . 02, (3) n = 300 and σ = 0 . 015, and (4) n = 1000 and σ = 0 . 01. The first column are the local KDEs ˆ f n,σ (( b,d )) evaluated at a diagram with only one feature; the mode is ξ 1 = (0 . 2 , 0 . 4). The second column are the local KDEs ˆ f n,σ (( b,d ) , (0 . 2 , 0 . 4)) evaluated at a diagram with two features, but with one feature fixed; the mode is ξ 2 = (0 . 14 , 0 . 42) The third column are the local KDEs ˆ f n,σ (( b,d ) , (0 . 2 , 0 . 4) , (0 . 14 , 0 . 42)) evaluated at a diagram with three features, but with two features fixed. The fourth column shows the same slices as the third, but with the colormap shifted down to show the smaller modes. The variance of certain features effects the rate of convergence nearby, similar to Gaussian KDE in Euclidean space for a distribution with modes of different variance.
