# References — MNO2019

- [1] H. Adams and et. al. , Persistence images: A stable vector representation of persistent homology , Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18 (2017), pp. 218–252, http://jmlr.org/papers/v18/16-337. html .
- [2] A. Adcock, E. Carlsson, and G. Carlsson , The ring of algebraic functions on persistence bar codes , Homology, Homotopy and Applications, 18 (2016), pp. 381–402, https://doi.org/10.4310/ HHA.2016.v18.n1.a21 .
- [3] A. Babichev and Y. Dabaghian , Persistent memories in transient networks , Emergent Complexity from Nonlinearity, in Physics, Engineering and the Life Sciences, 191 (2017), pp. 179–188.
- [4] P. Bendich, J. S. Marron, E. Miller, A. Pieloch, and S. Skwerer , Persistent homology analysis of brain artery trees , The Annals of Applied Statistics, 10 (2016), pp. 198–218, https://doi. org/10.1214/15-AOAS886 .
- [5] C. Biscio and J. Møller , The accumulated persistence function, a new useful functional summary statistic for topological data analysis, with a view to brain artery trees and spatial point process applications , Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, (2019), pp. 1537–2715, https://doi.org/10.1080/10618600.2019.1573686 .

- [6] O. Bobrowski, S. Mukherjee, and J. E. Taylor , Topological consistency via kernel estimation , Bernoulli, 23 (2017), pp. 288–328, https://doi.org/10.3150/15-BEJ744 .
- [7] T. Bonis, M. Ovsjanikov, S. Oudot, and F. Chazal , Persistence-based pooling for shape pose recognition , in Computational Topology in Image Context, ed. A Bac, JL Mari, New York: Springer, 2016, pp. 19–29.
- [8] P. Bubenik , Statistical topological data analysis using persistence landscapes , Journal of Machine Learning Research, 16 (2015), pp. 77–102, http://jmlr.org/papers/v16/bubenik15a.html .
- [9] P. Bubenik , The persistence landscape and some of its properties . arXiv 1810.04963, 2018, https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04963 .
- [10] G. Carlsson, T. Ishkhanov, V. D. Silva, and A. Zomorodian , On the local behavior of spaces of natural images , International Journal of Computer Vision, 76 (2008), pp. 1–12.
- [11] M. Carri ` ere, S. Y. Oudot, and M. Ovsjanikov , Stable topological signatures for points on 3D shapes , Computer Graphics Forum, 34 (2015), pp. 1–12.
- [12] F. Chazal and B. Michel , An introduction to topological data analysis: fundamental and practical aspects for data scientists . arXiv:1710.04019, 2017, https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.04019 .
- [13] J. Chisholm and S. Motherwell , A new algorithm for performing three-dimensional searches of the cambridge structural database , Journal of applied crystallography, 37 (2004), pp. 331–334.
- [14] M. K. Chung, J. L. Hanson, J. Ye, R. J. Davidson, and S. D. Pollak , Persistent homology in sparse regression and its application to brain morphometry , IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 34 (2015), pp. 1928–1939.
- [15] D. J. Daley and D. Vere-Jones , An introduction to the theory of point processes. Vol. I , Probability and its Applications (New York), Springer-Verlag, New York, second ed., 2003.
- [16] P. D lotko, R. Ghrist, M. Juda, and M. Mrozek , Distributed computation of coverage in sensor networks by homological methods , Applicable Algebra in Engineering, Communication and Computing, 23 (2012), pp. 29–58.
- [17] H. Edelsbrunner , Computational topology : an introduction , American Mathematical Society, Providence, R.I, 2010.
- [18] B. D. Fabio and M. Ferri , Comparing persistence diagrams through complex vectors , in International Conference on Image Analysis and Processing, 2015, pp. 294–305, https://doi.org/10.1007/ 978-3-319-23231-7_27 .
- [19] B. T. Fasy, F. Lecci, A. Rinaldo, L. Wasserman, S. Balakrishnan, and A. Singh , Confidence sets for persistence diagrams , The Annals of Statistics, 42 (2014), pp. 2301–2339, https://doi.org/ 10.1214/14-AOS1252 .
- [20] M. Gameiro, Y. Hiraoka, S. Izumi, M. Kramar, K. Mischaikow, and V. Nanda , A topological measurement of protein compressibility , Japan Journal of Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 32 (2015), pp. 1 – 17.
- [21] B. Gault, M. P. Moody, J. Cairney, and S. Ringer , Atom probe crystallography , Materials Today, 15 (2012), pp. 378–386.

- [22] R. Ghrist , Barcodes: The persistent topology of data , Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 45 (2008), pp. 61–75, https://doi.org/10.1090/S0273-0979-07-01191-3 .
- [23] I. R. Goodman , Mathematics of Data Fusion , Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, 1997.
- [24] D. Hicks, C. Oses, E. Gossett, G. Gomez, R. H. Taylor, C. Toher, M. Mehl, O. Levy, and S. Curtarolo , Aflow-sym: platform for the complete, automatic and self-consistent symmetry analysis of crystals , Acta Crystallographica Section A: Foundations and Advances, 74 (2018), pp. 184–203.
- [25] J. D. Honeycutt and H. C. Andersen , Molecular dynamics study of melting and freezing of small lennard-jones clusters , Journal of Physical Chemistry, 91 (1987), pp. 4950–4963.
- [26] D. P. Humphreys, M. R. McGuirl, M. Miyagi, and A. J. Blumberg , Fast estimation of recombination rates using topological data analysis , GENETICS, (2019), https://doi.org/10.1534/ genetics.118.301565 .
- [27] H. Jeffreys , Theory of Probability , Clarendon Press, 1961.
- [28] T. F. Kelly, M. K. Miller, K. Rajan, and S. P. Ringer , Atomic-scale tomography: A 2020 vision , Microscopy and Microanalysis, 19 (2013), pp. 652–664.
- [29] F. A. Khasawneh and E. Munch , Chatter detection in turning using persistent homology , Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, 70–71 (2016), pp. 527 – 541.
- [30] J. F. C. Kingman , Poisson processes , Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1993.
- [31] G. Kusano, K. Fukumizu, and Y. Hiraoka , Persistence weighted gaussian kernel for topological data analysis , Proceedings of the 33 rd International Conference on Machine Learning, 48 (2016), pp. 2004–2013.
- [32] P. Larsen, S. Schmidt, and J. Schiøtz , Robust structural identification via polyhedral template matching , Modelling and Simulation in Materials Science and Engineering, 24 (2016), p. 055007.
- [33] R. Mahler , Statistical multisource-multitarget information fusion , Artech House, Boston, 2007.
- [34] A. Marchese and V. Maroulas , Topological learning for acoustic signal identification , in 2016 19th International Conference on Information Fusion (FUSION), July 2016, pp. 1377–1381.
- [35] A. Marchese and V. Maroulas , Signal classification with a point process distance on the space of persistence diagrams , Advances in Data Analysis and Classification, 12 (2018), pp. 657–682, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11634-017-0294-x .
- [36] A. Marchese, V. Maroulas, and J. Mike , K-means clustering on the space of persistence diagrams , in Wavelets and Sparsity XVII, vol. 10394, International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2017, p. 103940W.
- [37] V. Maroulas and A. Nebenf ¨ uhr , Tracking rapid intracellular movements: a Bayesian random set approach , The Annals of Applied Statistics, 9 (2015), pp. 926–949, https://doi.org/10.1214/ 15-AOAS819 .
- [38] N. W. McNutt, O. Rios, V. Maroulas, and D. J. Keffer , Interfacial Li-ion localization in hierarchical carbon anodes , Carbon, 111 (2017), pp. 828–834, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon. 2016.10.061 .

- [39] J. Mike, C. D. Sumrall, V. Maroulas, and F. Schwartz , Nonlandmark classification in paleobiology: computational geometry as a tool for species discrimination , Paleobiology, 42 (2016), pp. 696–706.
- [40] J. L. Mike and V. Maroulas , Nonparametric estimation of probability density functions of random persistence diagrams . arXiv:1803.02739v2, 2018, https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.02739 .
- [41] Y. Mileyko, S. Mukherjee, and J. Harer , Probability measures on the space of persistence diagrams , Inverse Problems, 27 (2011), p. 124007, https://doi.org/10.1088/0266-5611/27/12/124007 .
- [42] M. K. Miller, T. Kelly, K. Rajan, and S. Ringer , The future of atom probe tomography , Materials Today, 15 (2012), pp. 158–165, https://doi.org/10.1016/S1369-7021(12)70069-X .
- [43] M. P. Moody, B. Gault, L. Stephenson, R. K. Marceau, R. Powles, A. Ceguerra, A. Breen, and S. P. Ringer , Lattice rectification in atom probe tomography: Toward true threedimensional atomic microscopy , Microscopy and Microanalysis, 17 (2011), pp. 226–239.
- [44] J. Moyal , The General Theory of Stochastic Population Processes , Acta Mathematica, 108 (1962), pp. 1–31, https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02545761 .
- [45] M. M. P. Nicolau, A. J. Levine, and G. E. Carlsson , Topology based data analysis identifies a subgroup of breast cancers with a unique mutational profile and excellent survival. , Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108 (2011), pp. 7265–70.
- [46] V. Patrangenaru, P. Bubenik, R. L. Paige, and D. Osborne , Topological data analysis for object data , arXiv:1804.10255, (2018).
- [47] C. M. M. Pereira and R. F. Mello , Persistent homology for time series and spatial data clustering , Expert Systems with Applications, 42 (2015), pp. 6026–6038.
- [48] J. Reininghaus, S. Huber, U. Bauer, and R. Kwitt , A stable multi-scale kernel for topological machine learning , in The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), July 2015, pp. 4741–4748, https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2015.7299106 .
- [49] A. Robinson and K. Turner , Hypothesis testing for topological data analysis , Journal of Applied and Computational Topology, 1 (2017), pp. 241–261, https://doi.org/10.1007/s41468-017-0008-7 .
- [50] L. Santodonato and et. al. , Deviation from high-entropy configurations in the atomic distributions of a multi-principal-element alloy , Nature communications, 6 (2015), p. 5964, https://doi.org/10. 1038/ncomms6964 .
- [51] I. Sgouralis, A. Nebenf ¨ uhr, and V. Maroulas , A Bayesian topological framework for the identification and reconstruction of subcellular motion , SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences, 10 (2017), pp. 871– 899, https://doi.org/10.1137/16M1095755 .
- [52] V. D. Silva and R. Ghrist , Coverage in sensor networks via persistent homology , Algebraic and Geometric Topology, 7 (2007), pp. 339–358, https://doi.org/10.2140/agt.2007.7.339 .
- [53] S. S. Singh, B. Vo, A. Baddeley, and S. Zuyev , Filters for spatial point processes , SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 48 (2009), pp. 2275—-2295, https://doi.org/10.1137/070710457 .
- [54] A. E. Sizemore, J. E. Phillips-Cremins, R. Ghrist, and D. S. Bassett , The importance of the whole: Topological data analysis for the network neuroscientist , Network Neuroscience, (2018), https://doi.org/10.1162/netn_a_00073 .

- [55] A. Spannaus, V. Maroulas, D. Keffer, and K. J. Law , Bayesian point set registration , in 2017 Matrix Annals, Springer, 2017.
- [56] A. Togo and I. Tanaka , Spglib : a software library for crystal symmetry search , arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.01590, (2018).
- [57] K. Turner, S. Mukherjee, and D. M. Boyer , Persistent homology transform for modeling shapes and surfaces , Information and Inference: A Journal of the IMA, 3 (2014), pp. 310–344, https://doi. org/10.1093/imaiai/iau011 .
- [58] V. Venkataraman, K. N. Ramamurthy, and P. Turaga , Persistent homology of attractors for action recognition , in 2016 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), 2016, pp. 4150-4154, https://doi.org/10.1109/ICIP.2016.7533141 .
- [59] L. Wasserman , Topological data analysis , Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application, 5 (2018), pp. 501–532.
- [60] K. Xia, X. Feng, Y. Tong, and G. W. Wei , Persistent homology for the quantitative prediction of fullerene stability , Journal of Computational Chemistry, 36 (2014), pp. 408–422, https://doi.org/ 10.1002/jcc.23816 .
- [61] Y. Zhang, T. Zuo, Z. Tang, M. Gao, K. Dahmen, P. Liaw, and Z. Lu , Microstructures and properties of high-entropy alloys , Progress in Materials Science, 61 (2014).
- [62] A. Ziletti, D. Kumar, M. Scheffler, and M. Ghiringhelli , Insightful classification of crystal structures using deep learning , Nature communications, 9 (2018), p. 2775, https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41467-018-05169-6 .
