
## BIBLIOGRAPHY

- [1] E. L. Allgower, D. J. Bates, A. J. Sommese, and C. W. Wampler. Solution of polynomial systems derived from differential equations. Computing, 76:1–10, 2006.
- [2] B. Ameneyro, V. Maroulas, and G. Siopsis. Quantum persistent homology. Journal of Applied and Computational Topology, pages 1–20, 2024.
- [3] D. N. Arnold, G. David, M. Filoche, D. Jerison, and S. Mayboroda. Computing spectra without solving eigenvalue problems. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 41(1):B69–B92, 2019.
- [4] G. Ausiello and L. Laura. Directed hypergraphs: Introduction and fundamental algorithms—a survey. Theoretical Computer Science, 658:293–306, 2017.
- [5] F. Baccini, F. Geraci, and G. Bianconi. Weighted simplicial complexes and their representation power of higher-order network data and topology. Physical Review E, 106(3):034319, 2022.
- [6] D. J. Bates, I. A. Fotiou, and P. Rostalski. A numerical algebraic geometry approach to nonlinear constrained optimal control. In 2007 46th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, pages 6256–6261. IEEE, 2007.
- [7] D. J. Bates, J. D. Hauenstein, A. J. Sommese, and C. W. Wampler. Bertini: Software for numerical algebraic geometry. Available at bertini.nd.edu with permanent doi: dx.doi.org/10.7274/R0H41PB5.
- [8] D. J. Bates, A. J. Sommese, J. D. Hauenstein, and C. W. Wampler. Numerically Solving Polynomial Systems with Bertini. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia, PA, 2013.
- [9] C. Battiloro, S. Sardellitti, S. Barbarossa, and P. Di Lorenzo. Topological signal processing over weighted simplicial complexes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.08561, 2023.
- [10] G. Bianconi. The topological dirac equation of networks and simplicial complexes. Journal of Physics: Complexity, 2(3):035022, 2021.
- [11] P. Biran and O. Cornea. A lagrangian quantum homology. New perspectives and challenges in symplectic field theory, 49:1–44, 2009.
- [12] P. Breiding and S. Timme. HomotopyContinuation.jl: A Package for Homotopy Continuation in Julia. In International Congress on Mathematical Software, pages 458–465. Springer, 2018.
- [13] S. Bressan, J. Li, S. Ren, and J. Wu. The embedded homology of hypergraphs and applications. Asian Journal of Mathematics, 23(3):479–500, 2019.
- [14] A. Bura, Q. He, and C. Reidys. Weighted homology of bi-structures over certain discrete valuation rings. Mathematics, 9(7):744, 2021.
- [15] A. C. Bura, N. S. Dutta, T. J. Li, and C. M. Reidys. A computational framework for weighted simplicial homology. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04612, 2022.
- [16] Z. Cang, L. Mu, and G.-W. Wei. Representability of algebraic topology for biomolecules in machine learning based scoring and virtual screening. PLoS computational biology, 14(1):e1005929, 2018.
- [17] Z. Cang, L. Mu, K. Wu, K. Opron, K. Xia, and G.-W. Wei. A topological approach for protein classification. Computational and Mathematical Biophysics, 3(1), 2015.
- [18] Z. Cang and G.-W. Wei. Analysis and prediction of protein folding energy changes upon mutation by element specific persistent homology. Bioinformatics, 33(22):3549– 3557, 2017.
- [19] Z. Cang and G.-W. Wei. Topologynet: Topology based deep convolutional and multitask neural networks for biomolecular property predictions. PLoS computational biology, 13(7):e1005690, 2017.
- [20] Z. Cang and G.-W. Wei. Integration of element specific persistent homology and machine learning for protein-ligand binding affinity prediction. International journal for numerical methods in biomedical engineering, 34(2):e2914, 2018.
- [21] Y. Cao, A. Yisimayi, F. Jian, W. Song, T. Xiao, L. Wang, S. Du, J. Wang, Q. Li, X. Chen, et al. BA. 2.12. 1, BA. 4 and BA. 5 escape antibodies elicited by Omicron infection. Nature, 608(7923):593–602, 2022.
- [22] L. Caputi and H. Riihimäki. Hochschild homology, and a persistent approach via connectivity digraphs. Journal of Applied and Computational Topology, pages 1–50, 2023.
- [23] D. Carlson, E. Haynsworth, and T. Markham. A generalization of the Schur complement by means of the Moore–Penrose inverse. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics, 26(1):169–175, 1974.
- [24] D. Chen, J. Liu, J. Wu, and G.-W. Wei. Persistent hyperdigraph homology and persistent hyperdigraph Laplacians. Foundations of Data Science, 5(4):558–588, 2023.
- [25] D. Chen, J. Liu, J. Wu, G.-W. Wei, F. Pan, and S.-T. Yau. Path topology in molecular and materials sciences. The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters, 14(4):954–964, 2023.
- [26] J. Chen, K. Gao, R. Wang, and G.-W. Wei. Prediction and mitigation of mutation threats to COVID-19 vaccines and antibody therapies. Chemical Science, 12(20):6929– 6948, 2021.
- [27] J. Chen, K. Gao, R. Wang, and G.-W. Wei. Revealing the threat of emerging SARSCoV-2 mutations to antibody therapies. Journal of Molecular Biology, 433(7744), 2021.
- [28] J. Chen, Y. Qiu, R. Wang, and G.-W. Wei. Persistent Laplacian projected Omicron BA. 4 and BA. 5 to become new dominating variants. Computers in Biology and Medicine, 151:106262, 2022.
- [29] J. Chen, R. Wang, N. B. Gilby, and G.-W. Wei. Omicron variant (B. 1.1. 529): infectivity, vaccine breakthrough, and antibody resistance. Journal of chemical information and modeling, 62(2):412–422, 2022.
- [30] J. Chen, R. Wang, M. Wang, and G.-W. Wei. Mutations strengthened SARS-CoV-2 infectivity. Journal of molecular biology, 432(19):5212–5226, 2020.
- [31] J. Chen and G.-W. Wei. Omicron BA. 2 (B. 1.1. 529.2): high potential for becoming the next dominant variant. The journal of physical chemistry letters, 13(17):3840–3849, 2022.
- [32] J. Chen, R. Zhao, Y. Tong, and G.-W. Wei. Evolutionary de rham-Hodge method. Discrete and continuous dynamical systems. Series B, 26(7):3785, 2021.
- [33] T. Chen, T.-L. Lee, and T.-Y. Li. Hom4ps-3: A parallel numerical solver for systems of polynomial equations based on polyhedral homotopy continuation methods. In H. Hong and C. Yap, editors, Mathematical Software – ICMS 2014, pages 183–190, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2014. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
- [34] S. Chowdhury, S. Huntsman, and M. Yutin. Path homologies of motifs and temporal network representations. Applied Network Science, 7(1):4, 2022.
- [35] S. Chowdhury and F. Mémoli. Persistent path homology of directed networks. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 1152–1169. SIAM, 2018.
- [36] F. R. Chung. The Laplacian of a hypergraph. In Expanding graphs, pages 21–36, 1992.
- [37] F. R. Chung. Spectral graph theory, volume 92. American Mathematical Soc., 1997.
- [38] O. T. Courtney and G. Bianconi. Weighted growing simplicial complexes. Physical Review E, 95(6):062301, 2017.
- [39] J. Curry. Sheaves, cosheaves and applications. PhD thesis, University of Pennsylvania, 2014.
- [40] Y. Dabaghian, F. Mémoli, L. Frank, and G. Carlsson. A topological paradigm for hippocampal spatial map formation using persistent homology. 2012.
- [41] R. J. M. Dawson. Homology of weighted simplicial complexes. Cahiers de Topologie et Géométrie Différentielle Catégoriques, 31(3):229–243, 1990.
- [42] M. Desbrun, E. Kanso, and Y. Tong. Discrete differential forms for computational modeling. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2006 Courses, pages 39–54. 2006.
- [43] B. Eckmann. Harmonische funktionen und randwertaufgaben in einem komplex. Commentarii Mathematici Helvetici, 17(1):240–255, 1944.
- [44] H. Edelsbrunner and J. Harer. Computational Topology: An Introduction. American Mathematical Society, 2010.
- [45] E. Emtander. Betti numbers of hypergraphs. Communications in algebra, 37(5):1545– 1571, 2009.
- [46] E. Estrada. Path laplacian matrices: introduction and application to the analysis of consensus in networks. Linear algebra and its applications, 436(9):3373–3391, 2012.
- [47] M. Fiedler. Algebraic connectivity of graphs. Czechoslovak mathematical journal, 23(2):298–305, 1973.
- [48] M. Gameiro, Y. Hiraoka, S. Izumi, M. Kramar, K. Mischaikow, and V. Nanda. A topological measurement of protein compressibility. Japan Journal of Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 32(1):1–17, 2015.
- [49] M. Gerstenhaber and A. Voronov. Higher operations on the hochschild complex. Funct. Anal. Appl, 29(1):3, 1995.
- [50] S. M.-C. Gobeil, R. Henderson, V. Stalls, K. Janowska, X. Huang, A. May, M. Speakman, E. Beaudoin, K. Manne, D. Li, et al. Structural diversity of the SARS-CoV-2 Omicron spike. Molecular cell, 2022.
- [51] S. M.-C. Gobeil, K. Janowska, S. McDowell, K. Mansouri, R. Parks, V. Stalls, M. F. Kopp, K. Manne, D. Li, K. Wiehe, et al. Effect of natural mutations of SARS-CoV-2 on spike structure, conformation, and antigenicity. Science, 373(6555):eabi6226, 2021.
- [52] T. E. Goldberg. Combinatorial Laplacians of simplicial complexes. Senior Thesis, Bard College, 2002.
- [53] A. Gomes and D. Miranda. Path cohomology of locally finite digraphs, Hodge’s theorem and the p -lazy random walk. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.04781, 2019.
- [54] C. González, G. M. Langdon, M. Bruix, A. Gálvez, E. Valdivia, M. Maqueda, and M. Rico. Bacteriocin as-48, a microbial cyclic polypeptide structurally and functionally related to mammalian nk-lysin. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 97(21):11221–11226, 2000.
- [55] A. Grigor’yan. Advances in path homology theory of digraphs. 2022.
- [56] A. Grigor’yan, R. Jimenez, Y. Muranov, and S.-T. Yau. Homology of path complexes and hypergraphs. Topology and its Applications, 267:106877, 2019.
- [57] A. Grigor’yan, Y. Lin, Y. Muranov, and S.-T. Yau. Homologies of path complexes and digraphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1207.2834, 2012.
- [58] A. Grigor’yan, Y. Lin, Y. Muranov, and S.-T. Yau. Homotopy theory for digraphs. Pure and Applied Mathematics Quarterly, 10(4):619–674, 2014.
- [59] A. Grigor’yan, Y. Lin, Y. Muranov, and S.-T. Yau. Cohomology of digraphs and (undirected) graphs. Asian Journal of Mathematics, 19(5):887–932, 2015.
- [60] A. Grigor’yan, Y. Lin, Y. V. Muranov, and S.-T. Yau. Path complexes and their homologies. Journal of Mathematical Sciences, 248:564–599, 2020.
- [61] A. Grigor’yan, Y. Muranov, and S.-T. Yau. Homologies of digraphs and künneth formulas. Communications in Analysis and Geometry, 25(5):969–1018, 2017.
- [62] E. Gross, B. Davis, K. L. Ho, D. J. Bates, and H. A. Harrington. Numerical algebraic geometry for model selection and its application to the life sciences. Journal of The Royal Society Interface, 13(123):20160256, 2016.
- [63] A. B. Gülen, F. Mémoli, Z. Wan, and Y. Wang. A generalization of the persistent Laplacian to simplicial maps. In E. W. Chambers and J. Gudmundsson, editors, 39th International Symposium on Computational Geometry (SoCG 2023), volume 258 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 37:1–37:17, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2023. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik.
- [64] J. Hansen. Laplacians of Cellular Sheaves: Theory and Applications. PhD thesis, University of Pennsylvania, 2020.
- [65] J. Hansen and R. Ghrist. Toward a spectral theory of cellular sheaves. Journal of Applied and Computational Topology, 3(4):315–358, 2019.
- [66] W. Hao, J. D. Hauenstein, B. Hu, Y. Liu, A. J. Sommese, and Y.-T. Zhang. Multiple stable steady states of a reaction-diffusion model on zebrafish dorsal-ventral patterning. Discrete & Continuous Dynamical Systems S, 4:1413, 2011.
- [67] W. Hao, B. Hu, and A. J. Sommese. Numerical algebraic geometry and differential equations. In Future Vision and Trends on Shapes, Geometry and Algebra, pages 39–53. Springer, 2014.
- [68] H. A. Harrington, N. Otter, H. Schenck, and U. Tillmann. Stratifying multiparameter persistent homology. SIAM Journal on Applied Algebra and Geometry, 3(3):439–471, 2019.
- [69] J. Hauenstein, J. Rodriguez, and B. Sturmfels. Maximum likelihood for matrices with rank constraints, 2013.
- [70] C. D. Hofer, R. Kwitt, and M. Niethammer. Learning representations of persistence barcodes. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 20(126):1–45, 2019.
- [71] M. Hoffmann, H. Kleine-Weber, S. Schroeder, N. Krüger, T. Herrler, S. Erichsen, T. S. Schiergens, G. Herrler, N.-H. Wu, A. Nitsche, et al. SARS-CoV-2 cell entry depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and is blocked by a clinically proven protease inhibitor. Cell, 181(2):271–280, 2020.
- [72] D. Horak and J. Jost. Spectra of combinatorial laplace operators on simplicial complexes. Advances in Mathematics, 244:303–336, 2013.
- [73] S. Hu and L. Qi. The Laplacian of a uniform hypergraph. Journal of Combinatorial Optimization, 29(2):331–366, 2015.
- [74] S. Huntsman. Path homology as a stronger analogue of cyclomatic complexity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.00944, 2020.
- [75] B. Jones and G.-W. Wei. Persistent flag Laplacians. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.12965, 2023.
- [76] J. Jost and R. Mulas. Hypergraph Laplace operators for chemical reaction networks. Advances in mathematics, 351:870–896, 2019.
- [77] E. Jurrus, D. Engel, K. Star, K. Monson, J. Brandi, L. E. Felberg, D. H. Brookes, L. Wilson, J. Chen, K. Liles, M. Chun, P. Li, D. W. Gohara, T. Dolinsky, R. Konecny, D. R. Koes, J. E. Nielsen, T. Head-Gordon, W. Geng, R. Krasny, G.-W. Wei, M. J. Holst, J. A. McCammon, and N. A. Baker. Improvements to the apbs biomolecular solvation software suite. Protein science : a publication of the Protein Society, 27(1):112–128, Jan 2018. 28836357[pmid].
- [78] P. M. Kasson, A. Zomorodian, S. Park, N. Singhal, L. J. Guibas, and V. S. Pande. Persistent voids: a new structural metric for membrane fusion. Bioinformatics, 23(14):1753–1759, 2007.
- [79] S. Krishnagopal and G. Bianconi. Spectral detection of simplicial communities via Hodge laplacians. Physical Review E, 104(6):064303, 2021.
- [80] J. Lan, J. Ge, J. Yu, S. Shan, H. Zhou, S. Fan, Q. Zhang, X. Shi, Q. Wang, L. Zhang, et al. Structure of the SARS-CoV-2 spike receptor-binding domain bound to the ACE2 receptor. Nature, 581(7807):215–220, 2020.
- [81] A. Leykin and F. Sottile. Galois groups of schubert problems via homotopy computation. Mathematics of Computation, 78(267):1749–1765, 2009.
- [82] L. Li, H. Liao, Y. Meng, W. Li, P. Han, K. Liu, Q. Wang, D. Li, Y. Zhang, L. Wang, et al. Structural basis of human ACE2 higher binding affinity to currently circulating Omicron SARS-CoV-2 sub-variants BA. 2 and BA. 1.1. Cell, 185(16):2952–2960, 2022.
- [83] T. J. Li and C. M. Reidys. On weighted simplicial homology. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.03435, 2022.
- [84] A. Lieutier. Talk: Persistent harmonic forms, 2014.
- [85] L.-H. Lim. Hodge Laplacians on graphs. Siam Review, 62(3):685–715, 2020.
- [86] Y. Lin, S. Ren, C. Wang, and J. Wu. Weighted path homology of weighted digraphs and persistence. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.09891, 2019.
- [87] J. Liu, D. Chen, and G.-W. Wei. Interaction homotopy and interaction homology. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.16322, 2023.
- [88] J. Liu, J. Li, and J. Wu. The algebraic stability for persistent Laplacians. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.03902, 2023.
- [89] R. Liu, X. Liu, and J. Wu. Persistent path-spectral (pps) based machine learning for protein–ligand binding affinity prediction. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling, 2023.
- [90] X. Liu, H. Feng, J. Wu, and K. Xia. Persistent spectral hypergraph based machine learning (psh-ml) for protein-ligand binding affinity prediction. Briefings in Bioinformatics, 22(5):bbab127, 2021.
- [91] X. Liu, H. Feng, J. Wu, and K. Xia. Hom-complex-based machine learning (hcml) for the prediction of protein–protein binding affinity changes upon mutation. Journal of chemical information and modeling, 62(17):3961–3969, 2022.
- [92] D. Lütgehetmann, D. Govc, J. P. Smith, and R. Levi. Computing persistent homology of directed flag complexes. Algorithms, 13(1):19, 2020.
- [93] D. Mannar, J. W. Saville, Z. Sun, X. Zhu, M. M. Marti, S. S. Srivastava, A. M. Berezuk, S. Zhou, K. S. Tuttle, M. D. Sobolewski, et al. SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern: spike protein mutational analysis and epitope for broad neutralization. Nature Communications, 13(1):1–12, 2022.
- [94] D. Mannar, J. W. Saville, X. Zhu, S. S. Srivastava, A. M. Berezuk, K. S. Tuttle, A. C. Marquez, I. Sekirov, and S. Subramaniam. SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant: Antibody evasion and cryo-EM structure of spike protein–ACE2 complex. Science, 375(6582):760–764, 2022.
- [95] P. Masulli and A. E. Villa. The topology of the directed clique complex as a network invariant. SpringerPlus, 5:1–12, 2016.
- [96] F. Mémoli, Z. Wan, and Y. Wang. Persistent Laplacians: Properties, algorithms and implications. SIAM Journal on Mathematics of Data Science, 4(2):858–884, 2022.
- [97] Z. Meng and K. Xia. Persistent spectral–based machine learning (perspect ml) for protein-ligand binding affinity prediction. Science Advances, 7(19):eabc5329, 2021.
- [98] A. Muhammad and M. Egerstedt. Control using higher order Laplacians in network topologies. In Proc. of 17th International Symposium on Mathematical Theory of Networks and Systems, pages 1024–1038. Citeseer, 2006.
- [99] J. R. Munkres. Elements of Algebraic Topology. Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc., 1984.
- [100] Y. Muranov, A. Szczepkowska, and V. Vershinin. Path homology of directed hypergraphs. Homology, Homotopy and Applications, 24(2):347–363, 2022.
