# References — BD2005

Baird, D., Weinberg, C., Zhou, H., Kamel, F., McConnaughey, D., Kesner, J. and Wilcox, A. (1999). Preimplantation urinary hormone profiles and the probability of conception in healthy women. *Fertility and Sterility* **71**, 40–49.

Baird, D., Wilcox, A., Weinberg, C., Kamel, F., McConnaughey, D., Musey, P. and Collins, D. (1997). Preimplantation hormonal differences between the conception and non-conception menstrual cycles of 32 normal women. *Human Reproduction* **12**, 2607–2613.

Brumback, B. and Rice, J. (1998). Smoothing spline models for the analysis of nested and crossed samples of curves. *JASA* **93**, 961–976.

Brumback, L. and Lindstrom, M. (2004). Self modeling with flexible, random time transformations. *Biometrics* **60**, 461–470.

Denison, D., Holmes, C., Mallick, B. and Smith, A. (2002). *Bayesian methods for nonlinear classification and regression*. John Wiley and Sons, Chichester, West Sussex, England.

DiCiccio, T., Kass, R., Raftery, A. and Wasserman, L. (1997). Computing Bayes factors by combining simulations and asymptotic approximations. *JASA* **92**, 903–915.

Dunson, D., Chen, Z. and Harry, J. (2003). A Bayesian approach for joint modeling of cluster size and subunit-specific outcomes. *Biometrics* **59**, 521–530.

Green, P. (1995). Reversible jump Markov chain Monte Carlo computation and Bayesian model determination. *Biometrika* **82**, 711–732.

Holmes, C. and Mallick, B. (2001). Bayesian regression with multivariate linear splines. *JRSS-B* **63**, 3–17.

Holmes, C. and Mallick, B. (2003). Generalized nonlinear modeling with multivariate free-knot regression splines. *JASA* **98**, 352–368.

Lipson, S. and Ellison, P. (1996). Comparison of salivary steroid profiles in naturally occurring conception and non-conception cycles. *Human Reproduction* **11**, 2090–2096.

Massafra, C., De Felice, C., Agnusdei, D., Gioia, D. and Bagnoli, F. (1999). Androgens and osteocalcin during the menstrual cycle. *Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism* **84**, 971–974.

Morris, J., Vannucci, M., Brown, P. and Carroll, R. (2003). Wavelet-based nonparametric modeling of hierarchical functions in colon carcinogenesis. *JASA* **98**, 573–583.

Percy, D. (1992). Prediction for seemingly unrelated regressions. *JRSS-B* **54**, 243–252.

Rice, J. (2004). Functional and longitudinal data analysis: perspectives on smoothing. *Stat. Sinica* **14**, 613–629.

Stewart, D., Overstreet, D., Nakajima, S. and Lasley, B. (1993). Enhanced ovarian and steroid secretion before implantation in early human pregnancy. *J. Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism* **76**, 1470–1476.

van Zonneveld, P., Scheffer, G., Broekmans, F., Blankenstein, M., de Jong, F., Looman, C., Habbema, J. and te Velde, E. (2003). Do cycle disturbances explain the age-related decline of female fertility? Cycle characteristics of women aged over 40 years compared with a reference population of young women. *Human Reproduction* **18**, 495–501.

Verzilli, C., Whittaker, J., N., S. and D., C. (2005). A hierarchical Bayesian model for predicting the functional consequences of amino-acid polymorphisms. *JRSS-C* **54**, 191–206.

Wilcox, A., Weinberg, C., O'Connor, J., Baird, D., Schlatterer, J., Canfield, R., Armstrong, E. and Nisula, B. (1988). Incidence of early loss of pregnancy. *New England Journal of Medicine* **319**, 189–194.

Zhang, D., Lin, X., Raz, J. and Sowers, M. (1998). Semiparametric stochastic mixed models for longitudinal data. *JASA* **93**, 710–719.
