# References — HTR2005

[Bol04] W. M. Bolstad. Introduction to Bayesian Statistics . Wiley Interscience, New Jersey, 2004.

[EF05] D. Endres and P. F¨oldia´k. Bayesian bin distribution inference and mutual information. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , 51(11):3766–3779, 2005.

[Goo83] I. J. Good. Explicativity, corroboration, and the relative odds of hypotheses. In Good thinking: The Foundations of Probability and its applications . University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, MN, 1983.

- [Hut05a] M. Hutter. Additional material to article. http://www.idsia.ch/ ˜ marcus/ai/pcreg.htm , 2005.
- [Hut05b] M. Hutter. Fast non-parametric Bayesian inference on infinite trees. In Proc. 10th International Conf. on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS2005) , pages 144–151. Society for Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2005.


[Jay03] E. T. Jaynes. Probability Theory: The Logic of Science . Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, MA, 2003.

[Jon03] K. Jong et al. Chromosomal breakpoint detection in human cancer. In Applications of Evolutionary Computing: EvoWorkshops’03 , volume 2611 of LNCS , pages 54–65. Springer, 2003.

[KH06] I. Kwee and M. Hutter. Bayesian CGH data analysis. Technical Report IDSIAXX-06, 2006. forthcoming.

[KW95] R. E. Kaass and L. Wasserman. A reference Bayesian test for nested hypotheses with large samples. Journal of the ACM , 90:773–795, 1995.

[Mac03] D. J. C. MacKay. Information theory, inference and learning algorithms . Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, MA, 2003.

[OVLW04] A. B. Olshen, E. S. Venkatraman, R. Lucito, and M. Wigler. Circular binary segmentation for the analysis of array-based DNA copy number data. Biostatistics , 5:557–572, 2004.

[Pic05] F. Picard et al. A statistical approach for array CGH data analysis. BMC Bioinformatics , 6, 2005.

[Pin98] D. Pinkel et al. High resolution analysis of DNA copy number variation using comparative genomic hybridization to microarrays. Nature Genetics , 20:207–211, 1998.

[PRLD05] F. Picard, S. Robin, E. Lebarbier, and J. J. Daudin. A segmentation-clustering problem for the analysis of array cgh data. In Proc. 11th International Symposium on Applied Stochastic Models and Data Analysis (ASMDA’05) , pages 145–152, Brest, France, 2005.

[Rin05] A. Rinaldi et al. Genomic profiling identifies the B cell associated tyrosine kinase SYK as a therapeutic target in mantle cell lymphoma. submitted , 2005.

[Sch78] G. Schwarz. Esimating the dimension of a model. Annals of Statistics , 6:461–464, 1978.

[SS75] A. Sen and M. S. Srivastava. On tests for detecting a change in mean. Annals of Statistics , 3:98–108, 1975.

[Wea99] D. L. Weakliem. A critique of the Bayesian information criterion for model selection. Sociological Methods and Research , 27:359–397, 1999.
