# References — MRA2015

Baladandayuthapani, V., Mallick, B., and Carrol, R. (2005), “Spatially adaptive Bayesian regression rplines (P-splines),” Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics , 14, 378–394.

Crainiceanu, C., Ruppert, D., Carrol, R., Joshi, A., and Goodner, B. (2007), “Spatially adaptive Bayesian penalized splines with heteroscedastic errors,” Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics , 16, 265–288.

Cryer, J. D. and Chan, K.-S. (2008), Time Series Analysis with Applications in R , Springer, 2nd ed.

Denison, D., Mallick, B., and Smith, A. (1998), “Automatic Bayesian curve fitting,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Statistical Methodology) , 60, 333–350.

DiMatteo, I., Genovese, C., and Kass, R. (2001), “Bayesian curve-fitting with free-knot splines,” Biometrika , 88, 1055–1071.

Donoho, D. and Johnstone, I. (1994), “Ideal spatial adaptation by wavelet shrinkage,” Biometrika , 3, 425–455.

(1995), “Adapting to unknown smoothness via wavelent shrinkage,” Journal of the American Statistical Association , 90, 1200–1224.

Eilers, P. and Marx, B. (1996), “Flexible smoothing with B-splines and penalties,” Statistical Science , 11, 89–102.

Eubank, R. L. (1999), Nonparametric Regression and Spline Smoothing , Marcel Dekker, 2nd ed.

Gelman, A. (2006), “Prior distribution for variace components in hierarchcal model (comment on article by Browne and Draper),” Bayesian Analysis , 1, 515–534.

Henderson, C. R. (1950), “Estimation of genetic paramters (abstract),” Annals of Mathematical Statistics , 21, 309–310.

Liang, F., Paulo, R., Molina, G., Clyde, M. A., and Berger, J. O. (2008), “Mixture g priors for Bayesian variable selection,” Journal of the American Statistical Association , 103, 410–423.

Lou, Z. and Wahba, G. (1997), “Hybrid adaptive splines,” Journal of the American Statistical Association , 92, 107–116.

Miyata, S. and Shen, X. (2003), “Adaptive free-knot splines,” Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics , 12, 197–213.

Pawitan, Y. and O’Sullivan, F. (1994), “Nonparametric spectral density estimation using penalized Whittle likelihood,” Journal of the American Statistical Association , 89, 600– 610.

Robinson, G. (1991), “That BLUP is a good thing: estimation of random effects,” Statistical Science , 6, 15–32.

Rosen, O., Stoffer, D. S., and Wood, S. (2009), “Local spectral analysis via a Bayesian mixture of smoothing splines,” Journal of the American Statistical Association , 104, 249–262.

Ruppert, D. and Carroll, R. (2000), “Spatially-adaptive penalties for spline fitting,” Australin and New Zealand Journal of Statistics , 42, 205–223.

Ruppert, D., Wand, M., and Carrol, R. (2003), Semiparametric Regression , Cambridge University Press.

Scheipl, F. and Kneib, T. (2009), “Locally adaptive bayesian P-splines with a normalexponential-gamma Prior,” Computational Statistics and Data Analysis , 53, 3533–3552.

Shumway, R. H. and Soffer, D. S. (2011), Time Series Analysis and Its Applications , Springer, 3rd ed.

Smith, M. and Kohn, R. (1996), “Nonparametric regression using Bayesian variable selection,” Journal of Econometrics , 75, 317–343.

Staniswalis, J. G. (1989), “Local bandwidth selection for kernel estimates,” Journal of the American Statistical Association , 84, 284–288.

Staniswalis, J. G. and Yandell, B. S. (1992), “Locally adaptive smoothing splines,” Journal of Statistical Computatiion and Simulation , 43, 45–53.

Wahba, G. (1980), “Automatic smoothing of the log periodogram,” Journal of the American Statistical Association , 75, 122–132.

Wand, M., Ormerod, J. T., Padoan, S. A., and Fru¨hwirth, R. (2012), “Mean field variational Bayes for elaborate distributions,” Bayesian Analysis , 7, 847–900.

Whittle, P. (1957), “Curve and periodogram smoothing,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodology) , 19, 38–63.

Wood, S., Jiang, W., and Tanner, M. (2002), “Bayesian mixture of splines for spatially sdaptive nonparametric regression,” Biometrika , 89, 513–528.

Yue, Y. and Speckman, P. (2010), “Nonstationary spatial Gaussian Markov random fields,” Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics , 19, 96–116.

Yue, Y., Speckman, P., and Sun, D. (2012), “Priors for Bayesian adaptive spline smoothing,” Annals of the Institute of Statistical Mathematics , 64, 577–613.

Zhou, S. and Shen, X. (2001), “Spatially adaptive regression splines and accurate knot selection schemes,” Journal of the American Statistical Association , 96, 247–259.
