# References — WLK2008

Anderson, E.; Bai, Z.; Bischof, C.; Blackford, S.; Demmel, J.; Dongarra, J.; Du Croz, J.; Greenbaum, A.; Hammarling, S.; McKenney, A.; Sorensen, D. LAPACK Users’ Guide. Vol. 3rd edition. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics; Philadelphia, PA: 1999.

Baker CI, Behrmann M, Olson CR. Impact of Learning on Representation of Parts and Wholes in Monkey Inferotemporal Cortex. Nature Neuroscience 2002;5(11):1210–1216.

Brown, BW.; Lovato, J. Library of C Routines for Random Number Generation. 1996. URL http://www.stat.umn.edu/HELP/ranlib-docs/ranlib.c.chs

Denison DGT, Mallick BK, Smith AFM. Bayesian MARS. Statistics and Comping 1998;8:337–346.

DiMatteo I, Genovese CR, Kass RE. Bayesian Curve Fitting with Free-Knot Splines. Biometrika 2001;88:1055–1073.

Dongarra JJ, Croz JD, Hammarling S, Duff I. Algorithm 679: A Set of Level 3 Basic Linear Algebra Subprograms: Model Implementation and Test Programs. ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software 1990a;16(1):18–28.

Dongarra JJ, Croz JD, Hammarling S, Duff I. A Set of Level 3 Basic Linear Algebra Subprograms. ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software 1990b;16(1):1–17.

Fan Y, Brooks P, Gelman A. Output Assessment for Monte Carlo Simulations via the Score Statistic. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics 2006;15:178–206.

Gelman, A.; Carlin, J.; Stern, H.; Rubin, D. Bayesian Data Analysis. Vol. 2nd edition. Chapman & Hall/ CRC; Boca Raton: 2004.

Green PJ. Reversible Jump Markov Chain Monte Carlo Computation and Bayesian Model Determination. Biometrika 1995;82:711–732.

Hansen MH, Kooperberg C. Spline Adaptation in Extended Linear Models. Statistical Science 2002;17:2–51.

Insightful Corp. S-PLUS Version 6.2. Seattle, WA: 2003. URL http://www.insightful.com/

Kass RE, Raftery AE. Bayes Factors. Journal of the American Statistical Association 1995;90:773–795.

Kass RE, Ventura V, Cai C. Statistical Smoothing of Neuronal Data. Network: Computation in Neural Systems 2003;14:5–15.

Kass RE, Wallstrom G. Invited Comment on “Spline Adaptation in Extended Linear Models” by Mark H. Hansen and Charles Kooperberg. Statistical Science 2002;17:24–29.

Kass RE, Wasserman LA. A Reference Bayesian Test for Nested Hypotheses and its Relationship to the Schwarz Criterion. Journal of the American Statistical Association 1995;90:928–934.

Liu JS, Wong WH, Kong A. Covariance Structure of the Gibbs Sampler with Applications to the Comparisons of Estimators and Augmentation Schemes. Biometrika 1994;81:27–40.

Pauler DK. The Schwarz Criterion and Related Methods for Normal Linear Models. Biometrika 1998;85:13–27.

R Development Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing; Vienna, Austria: 2006. ISBN 3-900051-07-0, URL http://www.R-project.org/

Stone CJ, Hansen M, Kooperberg C, Truong YK. The Use of Polynomial Splines and their Tensor Products in Extended Linear Modeling. The Annals of Statistics 1997;25:1371–1470.

Venables, WN.; Ripley, BD. Modern Applied Statistics with S. Vol. 4th edition. Springer-Verlag; New York: 2002.

Wallstrom GL, Kass RE, Miller A, Cohn JF, Fox NA. Automatic Correction of Ocular Artifact in the EEG: A Comparison of Regression-Based and Component-Based Methods. International Journal of Psychophysiology 2004;53:105–119. [PubMed: 15210288]

Zhang X, Roeder K, Wallstrom G, Devlin B. Integration of Association Statistics over Genomic Regions Using Bayesian Adaptive Regression Splines. Human Genomics 2003;1:20–29. [PubMed: 15601530]