<a id="sec-preface"></a>

# Preface

The importance of finite mixture models in the statistical analysis of data is underscored by the ever-increasing rate at which articles on mixture applications appear in the statistical and general scientific literature. The aim ofthis monograph isto provide an up-to-date account of the theory and applications of modeling via finite mixture distributions. Since the appearance of the monograph of McLachlan and Basford (1988) on finite mixtures; the literature has expanded enormously to the extent that another monograph on the topic is apt. In the past decade the extent and the potential of the applications of finite mixture models have widened considerably. Because of their flexibility, mixture models are being increasingly exploited as a convenient; semiparametric in which to model unknown distributional shapes. This is in addition to their obvious applications where there is group-structure in the data or where the aim is to explore the data for such structure, as in a cluster analysis. way

In this book the more recent work is 'surveyed against the background of the existing literature. The widespread use of mixture models in recent times is demonstrated by the fact that of the 800 or so references in this book, almost 409 of them have been published since 1995. A comprehensive account of the major issues involved with modeling via finite mixture distributions is provided. include identifiability problems, the actual of finite mixtures through use of the EM algorithm; the properties of the maximum likelihood estimators so obtained, the assessment of the number of components to be used in the mixture, and the applicability of asymptotic theory in providing abasis for the solutionsto some of these problems. The intentisto provide guidelines to users of mixture models on these various issues. The emphasis is on the applications of mixture models; not only in mainstream statistical analyses, but also in other areas such as unsupervised pattern recognition; speech recognition, and medical imaging. They fitting

With the advent of inexpensive; high-speed computers and the simultaneous rapid development in posterior simulation techniques such as Markov chain Monte Carlo

(MCMC) methods for enabling Bayesian estimation to be undertaken, practitioners are increasingly turning to Bayesian methods for the analysis ofcomplicated statistical models. In this book, we consider the latest developments in Bayesian estimation of mixture models.

New topics that are covered in this book include the scaling of the EM algorithm to allow mixture models to be used in data mining applications involving = mas sively huge databases. In the same spirit, there is also an account of the use of the sparselincremental EM algorithm and of multiresolution kd-trees for speeding up the implementation of the standard EM algorithm for the of mixture models. Another topic concerns the use of hierarchical mixtures-of-experts models as a erful new approach to nonlinear regression that is a serious competitor to well-known statistical procedures such as MARS and CART. Other recent developments covered include the use of mixture models for handling overdispersion in generalized linear models andproposals for dealing with mixed continuous and categorical variables. In provide a robust approach to mixture modeling- A further topic is the use of mixtures of factor analyzers which provide a way of mixture models tohigh-dimensional data. As mixture models provide a convenient basis for the modeling of dependent data by allowing the component-indicator variables to have a Markovian structure, there is also coverage of the latest developments in hidden Markov models, including the Bayesian approach to this problem. Another problem considered is the of mixture models to multivariate data in binned form; which arises in some important medical applications in practice. fitting powfitting fitting

The book also covers the latest developments on existing issues with mixture modeling, such as assessing the number of components to be used in a mixture model and the associated problem of determining how many clusters there are in clustering applications with mixture models.

In presenting these latest results, the authors have attempted to draw together the statistical literature with the machine learning and pattern recognition literature.

It is intended that the book should appeal to both applied and theoretical statisticians, as well as to investigators working in the many diverse areas in which relevant use can be made of finite mixture models. It will be assumed that the reader has a fair mathematical or statistical background. The main parts of the book describing the formulation of the finite mixture approach, detailing its methodology; discussing aspects of its implementation; and illustrating its application in many simple statistical contexts should be comprehensible to graduates with statistics as their major subject. The emphasis is on the practical applications of mixture models; and to this end, numerous examples are given.

Chapter begins with a discussion of mixture models and their applications and gives a bricf overview of the current state of the arca. It also includes a brief history of mixture models.

Chapter 2 focuses on the maximum likelihood of mixture models via the EM algorithm: It covers issues such as the choice of starting values; stopping criteria; the calculation of the observed information matrix, and the provision of standard errors either by information-based methods or by the bootstrap. fitting~

Chapter 3 specializes the results in Chapter 2 to mixtures of normal components. Given the tractability of the multivariate normal distribution, it is not surprising that mixture modeling of continuous data is invariably undertaken by normal mixtures. This chapter also discusses the occurrence and identification of so-called spurious local maximizers of the likelihood function, which is an issue with the of normal mixture models with no restrictions on the component-covariance matrices. A number of illustrative examples are presented. fitting

- In Chapter 4, we consider the Bayesian approach to the of mixture models. Estimation in a Bayesian framework is now feasible posterior simulation via recently developed MCMC methods. Bayes estimators for mixture models are well-defined so as the prior distributions are proper. Onc main hindrance is that improper priors yield improper posterior distributions; We discuss the use of ~partially proper priors; which do not require subjective input for the component parameters, yet the posterior is proper. We also discuss ways of handling other hindrances; including the effect of label switching, which arises when there there is no real prior information that allows one to discriminate between the components of a mixture model belonging to the same parametric family. fitting using long
- In Chapter 5, we consider the of mixture models with nonnormal component densities, including components suitable for mixed feature variables, where some are continuous and some are categorical. The maximum likelihood of commonly used discrete components such as the binomial and Poisson are undertaken within the wider framework of a mixture of generalized linear models (GLMs). The latter also has thecapacity to handle the regression case, where the response is allowed to depend on the value of a vector of covariates . The use of mixtures of GLMs for handling overdispersion in a single GLM component is discussed. In work related to mixtures of GLMs; the mixtures-of-experts model is considered, along with its extension, the hierarchical mixtures-of-experts model. This approach which combines aspects of finite mixture models and GLMs provides comparatively fast learning and generalization for nonlinear regression problems, including classification. fitting fitting good

Chapter 6 is devoted to the estimation of the order of a mixture model. It covers the two main approaches. One way is based on a penalized form of the likelihood whereby the likelihood is penalized by the subtraction of a term that 'penalizes" the model for the number of parameters in it. The other main way for deciding on the order of a mixture model is to carry out a hypothesis test, the likelihood ratio log using

- In Chapter 7, we consider the of mixtures of (multivariate) t distributions, as proposed in McLachlan and Peel (1998a) and Peel and McLachlan (2000). The t distribution provides a longer-tailed alternative to the normal distribution. Hence it provides a more robust approach to the of normal mixture models, as obser vations that are atypical of a component are given reduced weight in the calculation of its parameters . Also; the use of t components gives less extreme estimates of the posterior probabilities of component membership of the mixture model. fitting
- In Chapter 8, we consider mixtures of factor analyzers from the perspective of both (a) a method for model-based density estimation from high-dimensional data, and hence for the clustering of such data, and (b) a method for local dimensionality reduction. We also discuss the close linkof mixtures of factor analyzers with mixtures of probabilistic principal component analyzers. The mixtures of factor analyzers model enables a normal mixture model to be fitted to high-dimensional data. The number of free parameters is controlled through the dimension 9 of the latent factor space. It allows thus an interpolation in model complexities from isotropic to full covariance structures without any restrictions.

In Chapter 9, we consider the of finite mixture models to binned and truncated multivariate data by maximum likelihood via the EM algorithm. The solution for an arbitrary number of dimensions of the feature vector is specialized to the case of bivariate normal mixtures . fitting

Chapter 10 is on the use of mixture distributions to model failure-time data in a variety of situations, which occur in reliability and survival analyses. The focus is on the use of mixture distributions to model time to failure in the case of competing risks or failures .

- In Chapter 11, a case study is provided to illustrate the use of mixture models in the analysis of multivariate directional data. Mixtures of Kent distributions are used as an aid in joint set identification.
- In Chapter 12, we consider methods for improving the speed of the EM algorithm for the maximum likelihood of mixture models to databases that preserve the simplicity of implementation of the EM in its standard form. They include the incremental version of the EM algorithm, where only a partial E-step is performed before each M-step; and a sparse version; where not all the posterior probabilities of component membership are updated on each iteration. The use of multiresolution kd-trees to up the implementation of the E-step is also described. In addition, we consider how the EM algorithm can be scaled to handle very large databases with a limited memory buffer. fitting large speed
- In Chapter 13, recent advances on hidden Markov models are covered. Hidden Markov models are increasingly adopted in applications, since provide convenient way of 'formulating an extension of amixture model to allow for dependent data. Wediscuss hidden Markov chain models in the one-dimensional case and hidden Markov random fields in two or higher dimensions. being they

A brief account of some of the available software for the of mixture models is provided in the Appendix. This account includes a description of the program EMMIX (McLachlan et al., 1999) fitting

sions on mixture models, and Katrina Monico for her constructive comments and suggestions ~ on drafts of the manuscript. would also like to acknowledge gratefully financial support from the Australian Research Council. Thanks are due too to the authors and owners of copyrighted material for permission to reproduce tables and figures. They

Brisbane, Australia Geoffrey J. McLachlan David Peel

