# HOMOLOGY MANIFOLDS AND EUCLIDEAN BUNDLES

FABIAN HEBESTREIT, MARKUS LAND, MICHAEL WEISS, AND CHRISTOPH WINGES Abstract. We construct a Poincare´ complex whose periodic total surgery obstruction vanishes but whose Spivak normal fibration does not admit a reduction to a stable euclidean bundle. This contradicts the conjunction of two claims in the literature: Namely, on the one hand that a Poincare´ complex with vanishing periodic total surgery obstruction is homotopy equivalent to a homology manifold, which appears in work of Bryant–Ferry–Mio–Weinberger, and on the other that the Spivak normal fibration of a homology manifold always admits a reduction to a stable euclidean bundle, which appears in work of Ferry–Pedersen.

In his celebrated work on algebraic surgery theory, Ranicki associates to an oriented Poincare´ duality complex X an invariant, the total surgery obstruction tso( X ) of X , which for dim( X ) $\geq 5$ vanishes if and only if X is realised by a closed, topological manifold [Ran79 ]. It encodes in a single invariant whether the Spivak normal fibration of X admits a reduction to a stable euclidean bundle, and if so, whether any such reduction gives rise to a degree one normal map with trivial surgery obstruction. Through Siebenmann’s famous periodicity mistake and the consequent hunt for the missing manifolds, the question arose whether a similar total surgery obstruction for homology manifolds exists. This was finally established in [BFMW96 ] in terms of (what we shall refer to as) the periodic total surgery obstruction tso( X ) of X , a slightly coarser variant of Ranicki’s tso( X ). Based on earlier work of Ferry and Pedersen [FP95 ] that the Spivak normal fibration of a homology manifold always admits a reduction to a stable euclidean bundle, they proved that tso( X ) $= 0$ if and only if X is realised by a homology manifold, and established a surgery exact sequence for homology manifolds.

The main goal of this note is to show that the results of [BFMW96 ] and [FP95 ] are incompatible by constructing Poincare´ complexes X with tso( X ) $= 0$ but whose Spivak normal fibration do not admit reductions to euclidean bundles.

## Acknowledgements

The authors heartily thank Shmuel Weinberger for helpful discussions.

## Preliminaries

We will need the following facts surrounding the visible symmetric signatures and (periodic) total surgery obstructions of oriented Poincare´ complexes. In this part, X will usually refer to a general space, whereas P refers to oriented Poincare´ complexes. (i) For a space X , we write L vr $( X ) =$ L(( D ( Z ) /X ) $f , Ϙ$ vr ǫ ) for its visible quadratic (the case $r =$ q) and visible symmetric (the case $r =$ s) L-theory of Weiss and Ranicki, see [Ran92 , Section 9 ] where the visible symmetric L-groups are denoted V L ∗ ( Z ,X )

Date : June 24 , 2024.FH, MW and CW were supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG) through the collaborative research centres “Integral structures in Geometry and Representation theory” (grant no. TRR 358–491392403 ) at the University of Bielefeld, “Geometry: Deformations and Rigidity” (grant no. SFB 1442–427320536 ) at the University of Mu¨nster and “Higher invariants” (grant no. SFB 1085–224262486 ) at the University of Regensburg, respectively. MW is furthermore a member of the cluster “Mathematics Mu¨nster: DynamicsGeometry-Structure” (grant no. EXC 2044–390685587 ) funded by the DFG at the University of Mu¨nster.

in case X is represented by a finite simplicial complex and [CDH $+ 23$ , Variant 4.4.15 ] for a general treatment. Here ( D ( Z ) /X ) f denotes the full subcategory of the compact objects $( D ( Z ) /X ) \omega$ of D ( Z ) /X on finite objects, i.e. those whose K -theory class lies in the image of $K 0 ( Z ) \to K 0 ( Z \pi 1 ( X )) \sim = K 0$ (( D ( Z ) /X ) $\omega$ ) and ǫ denotes the trivial rank 0 spherical fibration over X to align with notation from [CDH $+ 23$ , CDH $+$ 20a]. The visible L-spectra are functorial in X ; for a map $f : X \to Y$ we write f ! : L vr $( X ) \to L$ vr ( Y ) for the induced map. We also have $Ϙ$ vq $ǫ = Ϙ q ǫ$ , so that visible quadratic Ltheory is simply quadratic L-theory. Moreover, the algebraic $\pi \pi$ -theorem says that for X connected, the map $X \to$ Bπ 1 ( X ) induces an isomorphism in visible quadratic L-theory, see [Ran92 , Section 10 ] and [CDH $+$ 20b, Corollary 1.2.33 ]. The cofibre of the map L vq $( X ) \to L$ vs ( X ) is denoted L vn ( X ) and called the visible normal L-theory of X . In classical terminology, the choice of working with finite objects corresponds to choosing decoration “h” for the L-spectra. vq q vs s vn n



(ii) We have L ( ∗ ) = L ( Z ), L ( ∗ ) = L ( Z ), and L ( ∗ ) = L ( Z ), the usual quadratic, symmetric, and normal L-theory spectrum of the integers, the latter two of which are ring spectra. In fact, they are E ∞ -ring spectra, but this will not matter for the purposes of this paper. From L n 0 ( Z ) ∼ = Z / 8 Z we see that L n ( Z )[ 1 2 ] = 0 so that the map L q ( Z )[ 1 2 ] → L s ( Z )[ 1 2 ] is an equivalence. Note also that L q ( Z ) does not refer to the qth symmetric L-group as it would in Ranicki’s notation.

(iii) When P is an oriented Poincare´ complex of dimension d , there is a canonical point σ vs ( P ) in Ω d L vs ( P ), called the visible symmetric signature of P , see [Ran92, Example 9.13] and [CDH + 23, Corollary 4.4.20]. Its image σ vn ( P ) in Ω d L vn ( P ) is called the visible normal signature of P . These data fit into the following commutative square whose left vertical arrow is the canonical forgetful map between oriented Poincare´ bordism and oriented normal bordism [Ran79].

SP (Ω (X) vsL (X) SN (Ω (X) vnL (X) The upper horizontal map takes the (Poincare´ bordism class of a) map $f : P \to X$ to $f ! ( \sigma vs ( P )).$ In particular $\sigma$ vs ( P ) is the image of [id P ] in $Ω$ SP n ( P ), see [Ran92 , Section 19 ]. Oriented normal bordism satisfies excision giving an equivalence $Ω$ SN $( X ) \simeq X \otimes$ MSG, and the lower horizontal arrow for $X = *$ is called Ranicki’s normal orientation , while the top horizontal arrow is often referred to as the Sullivan–Ranicki orientation .



(iv) For an oriented closed topological manifold M , we may view [id M ] as an element of Ω STop n ( M ), the oriented bordism of topological manifolds. By topological transversality [KS77], Ω STop ( X ) is equivalent to X ⊗ MSTop for any space X , showing that σ vs ( M ) canonically lifts along the assembly map M ⊗ L s ( Z ) → L vs ( M ) in this case.

(v) To better incorporate the orientation behaviour of the above elements, one considers L n 1 / 2 ( Z ) = Z × Z / 8 Z τ ≥ 0 L n ( Z ), the 1/2-connective normal L-theory . We then obtain canonical maps MSG → L n 1 / 2 ( Z ) as well as τ ≥ 0 L s ( Z ) → L n 1 / 2 ( Z ) lifting the normal orientation MSG → L n ( Z ) and the canonical projection L s ( Z ) → L n ( Z ).

(vi) The assembly map in visible normal L-theory is an equivalence: $X \otimes L^{n}(\mathbb{Z}) \simeq L^{vn}(X)$, see [Ran92 , Section 15 ]. We then denote by L vs 1 / 2 ( X ) the pullback of L vs $( X ) \to L$ vn $( X ) \gets X \otimes L^{n} 1 / 2 ( Z )$ and note that above square refines to the following square.

\Omega^{S P} ( X ) \longrightarrow L_{1 / 2}^{v s} ( X ) \\ \downharpoonleft_{\Omega^{S N} ( X )} \longrightarrow L_{1 / 2}^{v n} ( X )

Hence, the visible symmetric signature $\sigma$ vs ( P ) canonically lifts to a point $\sigma$ vs 1 / 2 ( P ) of L vs 1 / 2 ( P ). Its image $\sigma$ vn 1 / 2 ( P ) in L vn 1 / 2 ( P ) is called the normal fundamental class of P . alg



(vii) For a space X , we write S ( X ) = cofib[ X ⊗ L s ( Z ) → L vs ( X )] for the cofibre of the assembly map and S alg ( X ) = cofib[ X ⊗ τ ≥ 0 L vs ( Z ) → L s 1 / 2 ( X )]. There is a canonical map S alg ( X ) → S alg ( X ) induced by the maps τ ≥ 0 L s ( Z ) → L s ( Z ) and L vs 1 / 2 ( X ) → L vs ( X ). vs d vs d alg

(viii) The image of σ 1 / 2 ( P ) under the canonical map Ω L 1 / 2 ( P ) → Ω S ( P ) is denoted tso( P ) and called the total surgery obstruction of P . By point (iv) above, tso( P ) vanishes in case P is homotopy equivalent to a closed topological manifold, and the main result of [Ran79] says that for dim( P ) ≥ 5, the converse holds as well. alg

The image tso( P ) of tso( P ) under the canonical map $Ω d S$ alg $( P ) \to Ω d S ( P ),$ the periodic total surgery obstruction , is equally the image of $\sigma$ vs ( P ) under the canonical map $Ω d L$ vs $( P ) \to Ω d S$ alg ( P ). [BFMW96 , Main theorem] says that for dim( P ) $\geq 6$ , tso( P ) is a complete obstruction for P being homotopy equivalent to a closed homology manifold. Our results below imply that in this generality, the argument given in loc. cit. is not applicable, see also [BFMW24 ].

(ix) As a consequence of the fact that visible normal L-theory is excisive and the above definitions, there are equivalences S alg $( X ) \simeq$ cofib[ $X \otimes L^{q} ( Z ) \to L$ vq ( X )] as well as S alg $( X ) =$ cofib[ $X \otimes \tau \geq 1 L^{q} ( Z ) \to L$ vq ( X )]. Indeed, to see the latter, we note that there is the following commutative diagram

\begin{aligned}
X \otimes \tau_{\geq 0} L^{s} ( Z ) & \longrightarrow X \otimes L_{1 / 2}^{n} ( Z ) \\ & \downarrow \\ L^{v s} ( X ) & \longrightarrow L^{v n} ( X )
\end{aligned}

whose induced map from the top left corner to the pullback is the canonical map $X \otimes \tau \geq 0 L^{s} ( Z ) \to L$ vs 1 / 2 ( X ). The claimed description of its cofibre then follows from the canonical equivalence $\tau^{\geq 1} L^{q}(\mathbb{Z}) \simeq \mathrm{fib}[\tau^{\geq 0} L^{s}(\mathbb{Z}) \to L^{n}_{1/2}(\mathbb{Z})]. The image ro( P ) of tso( P ) under the boundary map $Ω S ( P ) \to Ω [ P \otimes \tau \geq 1 L ( Z )],$ the reduction obstruction , is a complete obstruction for the Spivak normal fibration of P to admit a reduction to a stable euclidean bundle [Ran79 ]. We denote by ro( P ) the image of ro( P ) under the canonical map induced by $\tau \geq 1 L^{q} ( Z ) \to L^{q} ( Z ).$ Note that ro( P ) is then also the image of tso( P ) under the boundary map $Ω d S$ alg $( P ) \to Ω d - 1 [ P \otimes L^{q} ( Z )].$

(xi) Using the above, Ranicki [Ran79 ] shows that the space of paths from tso( P ) to 0 inside $Ω \infty + d S$ alg ( P ) is canonically equivalent to the topological manifold block structure space $S ( P )$. In particular, the topological block structure space $S ( M )$ of a topological manifold M identifies canonically with $Ω \infty + d$ +1 S alg ( M ). Likewise, [BFMW96 ] ought to give an identification of the homology manifold block structure space S H ( P ) with the space of paths from tso( P ) to 0 inside $Ω \infty + d S$ alg ( P ).

space ( P ) with the space of paths from tso( P ) to 0 inside $Ω ( P ).$ Again, our results below imply that this last claim suffers from the defect indicated in point (viii): Even its consequence on $\pi 0$ currently relies on the existence of euclidean normal bundles for homology manifolds, see [BFMW24 ].

Before coming to our main results, the construction of certain Poincare´ complexes, we prove the following positive result about the existence of euclidean reductions of Spivak normal fibrations of oriented Poincare´ complexes.

### 1. Proposition
Let X be an oriented d -dimensional Poincare´ complex such that ro( X ) $= 0$ . Then the following statements are equivalent:

(i) The Spivak normal fibration of X admits a reduction to a stable euclidean bundle,

(ii) there exists a degree one map M → X where M is an oriented closed topological manifold, and 1 1

(iii) the fundamental class [ X ] ∈ H d ( X ; Z [ 2 ]) lifts to a fundamental class in ko d ( X )[ 2 ] .

Proof. An argument of Sullivan’s shows that (i) implies that there exists a degree one normal map $M \to X$ for some closed topological manifold M , see [Wal99 , Prop. 10.2 ] or [LM24 , Theorem 7.19 ] for the smooth case. Using topological transversality [KS77 ] the same argument applies to the topological case. In particular, (i) implies (ii). Given (ii), we find that $[ M \to X ]$ determines an element of MSTop d ( X ) which lifts the fundamental class $[ X ] \in H d ( X ; Z ).$ In particular, after inverting 2 , one may use the Sullivan–Ranicki orientation MSTop[ 1 2 ] $\to \tau \geq 0 L^{s}$ ( Z )[ 1 2 ] $\simeq$ ko[ 1 2 ] to lift the fundamental class in H d ( X ; Z [ 1 2 ]) to ko d ( X )[ 1 2 ]. See [LN18 , Corollary 5.4 & following Remark] for an equivalence $L^{s} ( Z )[ 1 2 ] \simeq$ KO[ 1 2 ] of $E \infty$ ring spectra and [LNS23 , Section 8 ] for perspectives on the Sullivan–Ranicki orientation and general information about $\pi 0$ Map $E \infty$ (MSTop[ 1 2 ] , ko[ 1 2 ]). 1 Finally, consider the exact sequence

\pi_{d} ( X \otimes L^{q} ( Z ) ) \stackrel{( * )}{\longrightarrow} \pi_{d} ( X \otimes \tau_{\leq 0} L^{q} ( Z ) ) \to \pi_{d - 1} ( X \otimes \tau_{\geq 1} L^{q} ( Z ) ) \to \pi_{d - 1} ( X \otimes L^{q} ( Z ) )

and recall that the second to last group contains the element ro( X ) which is sent to ro( X ) $= 0$ in the final group above. Note that the map labelled $(\ast)$ is 2-locally surjective, as follows from the 2-local splitting of $L^{q}$ ( Z ) into Eilenberg-Mac Lane spectra. Away from 2 , we may use the equivalence $L^{q} ( Z )[ 1 2 ] \simeq$ KO[ 1 2 ] so that under assumption (iii) 2 the map $(\ast)[1/2]$ is also surjective, showing that ro( X ) $= 0$ and hence (i).

$\square$ We note that ro( X ) $= 0$ is implied by tso( X ) $= 0$ , in which case the following also appears in [BFMW24 ].

### 2. Corollary
Let X be an oriented Poincare´ complex with ro( X ) $= 0$ . If dim( X ) $\leq 6$ , then the Spivak normal fibration admits a reduction to a stable euclidean bundle. 1 By a result of Sullivan’s [MM79 , 5.12 & 5.24 ], one has Map $E \infty$ (MSTop[ 1 2 ] , ko[ 1 2 ]) $\simeq$ Map $E \infty$ (MSO[ 1 2 ] , ko[ 1 2 ]). 2Note that for E any spectrum, the canonical map $\pi d ( X \otimes \tau \geq 0 E ) \to \pi d ( X \otimes E )$ is an isomorphism.

Proof. It follows from work of Thom [Tho54 ] that any homology class of degree $\leq 6$ is represented by a smooth, in particular by a topological, closed manifold, so Proposition 1 (ii) is valid.

### 3. Remark
In the above argument, we have used that for an oriented Poincare´ complex X , ro( X ) $= 0$ implies that ro( X ) vanishes 2-locally. One may wonder whether the same is true for the total surgery obstructions: If tso( X ) $= 0$ , does it follow that tso( X ) vanishes 2-locally? We do not know the answer to this question currently. Note, however, that the 2-local splitting of $L^{q}$ ( Z ) does not induce a 2-local splitting of S alg ( X ) into S alg ( X ) and a second summand: Indeed, suppose that X is d -dimensional aspherical Poincare´ complex and $\pi 1 ( X )$ is a Farrell–Jones group. Then S alg $( X ) = 0$ but S alg $( X ) ( 2 ) \simeq [ X \otimes \tau \leq 0 L^{q} ( Z )] ( 2 ) =$ 0. Nevertheless, at least conjecturally, one has tso( X ) $= 0$ whenever X is aspherical, see [Lu¨c24 , Conjecture 9.178 ].

$\not\equiv$

We come to the main contribution of this paper.

## Main Theorem
There exists an oriented Poincare´ complex E with tso( E ) $= 0$ whose Spivak normal fibration does not admit a reduction to a euclidean bundle. We consider the following construction. Let $¯ x \in \pi ℓ$ (Bgl 1 ( S )) be an element of positive degree ℓ and order n . Let M ( Z /n Z ,ℓ ) be the corresponding mod n Moore space in dimension ℓ . By assumption, there is then a map $x : M ( Z /n Z ,ℓ ) \to$ Bgl 1 ( S ) whose composite with the tautological map $S ℓ \to M ( Z /n Z ,ℓ )$ is ¯ x . By framed surgeries below the middle dimension, we may construct a map $f : M \to M ( Z /n Z ,ℓ )$ inducing an isomorphism on $\pi ℓ$ with M a stably framed (smooth) m -manifold for any $m > 2 ℓ$ ; e.g. by framed surgery on an appropriately embedded ℓ -sphere in $S ℓ \times S m - ℓ$ . Let $k \geq ℓ$ +1 be sufficiently large, so that $-$ xf : $M \to$ Bgl 1 ( S ) lifts along Baut $* ( S k ) \to$ Bgl 1 ( S ) and let $\pi : E \to M$ be the associated pointed spherical fibration over M . By choice of k , the resulting map $E \to M ( Z /n Z ,ℓ )$ is then again an isomorphism on $\pi ℓ$ . Moreover, E is a Poincare´ complex with Spivak normal fibration classified by the composite

E \stackrel{\pi}{\rightarrow} M \stackrel{x f}{\longrightarrow} \{- d \} \times B g l_{1} ( S ) \subseteq P i c ( S ) ,

where $d = m + k$ is the dimension of E . Proof of Main Theorem. Let $¯ x \in \pi 4$ (Bgl 1 ( S )) $\sim = Z / 24 Z$ be a generator of the 3-torsion and consider the Poincare´ complex E associated to ¯ x as constructed above. Then, the composite

E \stackrel{\pi}{\rightarrow} M \stackrel{f}{\rightarrow} M ( Z / 3 Z , 4 ) \stackrel{x}{\rightarrow} B g l_{1} ( S )

classifies the Spivak normal fibration of E but does not lift along BTop $\to$ Bgl 1 ( S ). Indeed, on $\pi 4$ it induces an inclusion $Z / 3 Z \subseteq Z / 24 Z$ , which cannot factor through $Z \oplus Z / 2 \sim = \pi 4$ (BTop) [Mil88 , Lemma 9 ]. It then remains to show tso( E ) $=$ 0. To that end, note first that E is simply connected. As a consequence of the $\pi \pi$ -theorem, we thus find that the map

\Omega^{d \overline{\mathcal{S}}^{a l g}} ( E ) \rightarrow \Omega^{d - 1} [ E \otimes L^{q} ( Z ) ]

is split injective on homotopy groups. In particular, to verify that tso( E ) $= 0$ , it suffices to show that ro( E ) $=$ 0. To do so, recall that the composite $E \to M ( Z / 3 Z , 4 ) \to{- d} \times$ Bgl 1 ( S ) is the Spivak normal fibration D E of E . In particular, we obtain a map Th( D E ) $\to Ω d$ Th( x ), where Th( $-$ ) is the Thom spectrum functor. Applying Spanier–Whitehead duality

\begin{aligned}
\pi_{- 1} ( D ( T h ( x ) ) \otimes \tau_{\geq 1} L^{q} ( Z ) ) & \longrightarrow \pi_{d - 1} ( E \otimes \tau_{\geq 1} L^{q} ( Z ) ) \\ & \downarrow \\ \pi_{- 1} ( D ( T h ( x ) ) \otimes L^{q} ( Z ) ) & \longrightarrow \pi_{d - 1} ( E \otimes L^{q} ( Z ) )
\end{aligned}

Now, the element ro( E ) in the top right corner is in the image of the upper horizontal map, by naturality of Thom classes. The proof that ro( E ), and hence tso( E ), vanishes is hence finished once we show that the left lower corner in the above diagram is trivial. To that end, one first computes that D (Th( x )) is equivalent to $fib(S^x \to S^{-4/3})$; generally the Thom spectrum of a map $\Sigma X \to BGL_1(S)$, for a pointed space X , identifies with the cofibre of the induced map $\Sigma \infty X \to S$ , for example the argument in [Lan22 , Section A.13 ] applies verbatim to general suspensions in place of spheres. Consequently, we obtain an exact sequence

\pi_{0} ( L^{q} ( Z ) ) \stackrel{x}{\longrightarrow} \pi_{4} ( L^{q} ( Z ) / 3 ) \longrightarrow \pi_{- 1} ( D ( T h ( x ) ) \otimes L^{q} ( Z ) ) \to 0

with first group isomorphic to Z and middle one isomorphic to Z / 3 Z . We claim that the map labelled x in this sequence is surjective. To prove this, we may localise at 3 , so that $L^{q}$ ( Z ) may be replaced by KO, see again [LN18 , Corollary 5.4 ] and the following remark. Then the claim follows from the fact that the map $S / 3 \to$ KO / 3 induced by the unit of KO induces a bijection on $\pi 4$ [Ada66 , Thm. 1.7 ]. 3

### 4. Remark
The above proof of Main Theorem works, essentially verbatim, more generally for any non-trivial element $¯ x \in \pi 4 k - 1 ( S )$ of odd order n which is in the image of the J homomorphism. Indeed, one first observes that [Bru68 , Theorem 4.7 & Remark 4.9 ], together with the equivalence Top / PL $\simeq K ( Z / 2 , 3 )$ [KS77 ], says that the odd torsion of $\pi 4 k$ (BTop) maps via the canonical map BTop $\to$ Bgl 1 ( S ) isomorphically onto the kernel of Adams’ e invariant. Since e (¯ x ) is non-zero [Ada66 , Theorem 1.5 & 1.6 ] we deduce that the Spivak normal fibration of the Poincare´ complex E constructed from ¯ x does not admit a reduction to a euclidean bundle. To see that tso( E ) $= 0$ , it again suffices to show that the composite

S \stackrel{x}{\rightarrow} \Omega^{4 k} S / n \rightarrow \Omega^{4 k} K O / n

is surjective on $\pi 0$ . To do this, one can reduce to the case where $n = p l$ for some odd prime p . Then we use that the image of the J -homomorphism maps isomorphically onto $\pi 4 k - 1 ( L_{K} ( 1 ) S )$ and that the map $\pi 4 k$ (KO /n ) $\to \pi 4 k$ (KU /n ) is an isomorphism. Doing this, it will suffice to show that the map

\pi_{4 k} ( L_{K ( 1 )} S / n ) \to \pi_{4 k} ( K U / n ) ,

induced by the unit of KU and the fact that KU /n is K ( 1 )-local, is an isomorphism. This follows from an inspection of the long exact sequence induced from the equivalence $L_{K} ( 1 ) S \simeq$ (KU $\wedge p$ ) h Z × p together with the fact that n divides the order of $\pi 4 k - 1 ( L_{K} ( 1 ) S ).$ Concrete examples of elements ¯ x as needed are given by generators of the p -torsion of $\pi 2 p - 3 ( S )$ for any odd prime p . The case $p = 3$ is the one we used above.

3 This statement can equivalently be phrased as saying that x , thought of as a map $\Sigma 4 S / 3 \to S / 3$ is a v 1 -map in the sense of chromatic homotopy theory, i.e. induces an isomorphism in K -theory.

## Consequences
Let us list a number of consequences of the above constructions.

(i) Main Theorem invalidates an implicit assumption made in the proof of the main result of [BFMW96], as is explained also in the recent erratum [BFMW24] to loc. cit. If, however, [BFMW96, Main theorem] is correct as stated, then the Poincare´ complexes E constructed before the proof of Main Theorem are homotopy equivalent to closed homology manifolds whose Spivak normal fibrations do not admit reductions to stable euclidean bundles provided ¯ x ∈ π ℓ (Bgl 1 ( S )) has odd order and is in the image of the J -homomorphism, see Remark 4. This would invalidate [FP95, Theorem 16.6].

(ii) Weinberger informed us that he knows an argument that [BFMW96, Main Theorem] is correct as stated provided the Poincare´ complex X admits a π π -2-patch structure. This addition would imply that our complexes are realised by closed homology manifolds, as we show in Proposition 5 below that the Poincare´ complexes E constructed above admit such a structure.

(iii) Weinberger also informed us that he knows an argument that a certain family version of [BFMW96, Main theorem], see point (xi) above, is correct for families with typical fibre a topological manifold. We will show below that this implies that the fibrations π : E → M constructed before the proof of Main Theorem are fibre homotopy equivalent to block bundles with typical fibre a homology manifold provided ¯ x ∈ π ℓ (Bgl 1 ( S )) has odd order, see Corollary 8. Again, it follows that E is homotopy equivalent to a closed homology manifold. Moreover, if ¯ x does not lie in the kernel of Adams’ e -invariant, then the Spivak normal fibration of E does not admit a reduction to a euclidean bundle, see Remark 4.

(iv) The discussion of Quinn’s resolution obstruction for homology manifolds in [BFMW96] also uses that the Spivak normal fibration admits a reduction to a euclidean bundle, and hence suffers the same defect as [BFMW96, Main Theorem].

## Patch structures
Let us recall that a $\pi$-2-patch structure on a Poincare' complex $X$ consists of two manifolds $M$ and $M'$ whose boundary inclusions $\partial M \subseteq M$ and $\partial M' \subseteq M'$ are equivalences on 1-truncations, and homotopy equivalences $\varphi : \partial M \simeq \partial M'$ as well as $\psi : X \simeq M \cup_\varphi M'$ .

### 5. Proposition
The Poincare' complexes E constructed above admit $\pi$-2-patch structures provided $l \geq 3$ . Proof. We note that $M ( Z /n Z ,l ) \sim = \Sigma M ( Z /n Z ,l - 1 )$ and consider a transverse inverse image $N \subseteq M$ of $M ( Z /n Z ,l - 1 )$ along $f : M \to M ( Z /n Z ,l ).$ By construction $N \subseteq M$ is a codimension one submanifold with trivial normal bundle. Since $M ( Z /n Z ,l - 1 )$ is simply connected, by ambient surgeries on N , one can achieve that N is simply connected as well, see [Qui74 ] for general results along these lines. Consequently, M \ N decomposes into a disjoint union of two pieces which are the interiors of compact manifolds $M +$ and $M -$ with common boundary N . Moreover, $M \pm$ is again simply connected, so that the inclusion $N \subseteq M \pm$ is an equivalence on 1-types. In other words, M is obtained from two manifolds $M +$ and $M -$ by glueing along a diffeomorphism $\partial M_+ \sim = \partial M_-$ . Moreover, the fibration classified by $M \to Baut_*(S^k)$ is trivial when restricted to $M \pm$ . It follows that E is obtained from the two manifolds $M + \times S k$ and $M - \times S k$ by glueing along a homotopy equivalence $\partial M_+ \times S^k \simeq \partial M_- \times S^k$ , which is the promised $\pi$-2-patch structure on E.

We recall that M admits a canonical orientation in L n ( Z )-homology via the map MSG → L n ( Z ), i.e. a point σ n ( M ) in Ω d [ M ⊗ L n ( Z )], capping with which induces Poincare´ duality. Applying this construction fibrewise, we obtain a canonical section σ n ( π ) of the parametrised spectrum Ω d [( E,B ) ⊗ B L n ( Z )] of L n ( Z )-modules. alg

Similarly, we may consider the parametrised spectrum S ( π ) over B sending a point b ∈ B to S alg ( E b ). The periodic total surgery obstructions tso( E b ) of the fibres E b then assemble into a section tso( π ) of Ω d S alg ( π ).

We will now operate under the following. Assumption. Given a oriented Poincare´ fibration $\pi : E \to B$ , with typical fibre F , then $\pi$ is fibre homotopy equivalent to a block bundle with typical fibre a homology manifold (homotopy equivalent to F ) if and only if the just described section tso( $\pi$ ) vanishes. As indicated above, when the typical fibre F is a closed topological manifold, this follows from a family version of the results of [BFMW96 ], which Weinberger confirmed to us is valid. In particular, when tso( $\pi$ ) vanishes and B is a manifold, E is homotopy equivalent to a homology manifold.

### 6. Lemma
The following are equivalent for a pointed oriented Poincar´ e fibration $\pi : E \to B$ with simply connected fibres.

(i) Giving a trivialisation of the fibrewise periodic total surgery obstruction tso( π ) , and n d

(ii) giving a lift of the fibrewise normal orientation σ ( π ) to a section of Ω [( E,B ) ⊗ B L s ( Z )] .

Proof. We consider the following diagram of B -parametrised spectra: (we write everywhere the value of these objects over a point b , and note that all constructions are functorial in b ).

\begin{aligned}
( E_{b} , s ( b ) ) \otimes L^{s ( Z )} & \longrightarrow L^{\nu s ( E_{b} , s ( b ) )} \longrightarrow \overline{s}^{\arg} ( E_{b} ) \\ \downarrow & \quad \downarrow \simeq \\ ( E_{b} , s ( b ) ) \otimes L^{n} ( Z ) & \stackrel{\simeq}{\longrightarrow} L^{\nu n} ( E_{b} , s ( b ) )
\end{aligned}

The horizontal and vertical composites are each fibre sequences. This is because S alg ( $E_{b}$ ) is the cofibre of the assembly map in (visible) symmetric L-theory, which is, by construction, an equivalence on the basepoint s ( b ). We then note that the algebraic $\pi \pi$ -theorem implies that the quadratic L-theory term on the very top vanishes as we assume $E_{b}$ to be simply connected. Moreover, we recall that the assembly map in visible normal L-theory is an equivalence. We therefore find the two indicated equivalences. Passing to spaces of sections we obtain similar fibre sequences and equivalences. Now, by construction, the canonical section of $b \to ( E_{b} ,s ( b )) \otimes L^{n} ( Z )$ corresponds under the two indicated equivalences to the canonical section of $b \to L$ vs ( $E_{b}$ ,s ( b )) taking the fibrewise symmetric signature of the bundle $E \to B$ . Therefore, a lift of the left vertical map on spaces of sections is equivalent to the

### 7. Theorem
Let $\pi : E \to B$ be an oriented pointed spherical fibration with typical fibre homotopy equivalent to S d whose associated element in BSG 0 ( B ) is of odd order. Then there exists a trivialization of tso( $\pi$ ) .

Proof. Recall that BSG and Bsl 1 ( S ) denote the same infinite loop space. We will show that the data in (ii) of Lemma 6 can be given. First, we note that by classical orientation theory, the composite

\ B s l_{1} ( S_{( 2 )} ) \to B g l_{1} ( S_{( 2 )} ) \to B g l_{1} ( M S G_{( 2 )} )

is canonically trivialised. More precisely, the null-homotopy is induced by the canonical nullhomotopy of the fibre sequence

B s l_{1} ( S_{( 2 )} ) \to B g l_{1} ( S_{( 2 )} ) \to B Z_{( 2 )}^{\times}

and a map $B Z \times ( 2 ) \to$ Bgl 1 (MSG ( 2 ) ). On endomorphism spaces, this latter map sends a 2-local unit q to the self map of MSG ( 2 ) which is given by multiplication with q . 0 Next, we note that the assumption that $\pi \in$ BSG ( B ) is of odd order is equivalent to the statement that the composite

B \rightarrow B s l_{1} ( S ) \rightarrow B s l_{1} ( S_{( 2 )} )

is null homotopic, where the first map is the classifying map for the stable spherical fibration associated to $\pi : E \to B$ . We therefore have two null-homotopies of the composite

B \rightarrow B s l_{1} ( S ) \rightarrow B Z_{( 2 )}^{\times}

which together determine a map $B \to Z \times ( 2 )$ . The composite

B \rightarrow B s l_{1} ( S ) \rightarrow B s l_{1} ( M S G ) \rightarrow B s l_{1} ( L^{n} ( Z ) )

which induces the fibrewise normal orientation, i.e. the canonical section of the bundle $( E,B ) \otimes B L n ( Z )$ discussed above, is therefore also null-homotopic in two ways, whose difference is determined by the composite

B \rightarrow Z_{( 2 )}^{\times} \rightarrow g l_{1} ( M S G_{( 2 )} ) \rightarrow g l_{1} ( L^{n} ( Z ) ) .

As a consequence, we find that we can lift the fibrewise normal orientation to a section of the bundle $E \otimes B L s ( Z ) ( 2 )$ simply because we can tautologically lift the section coming from the trivialisation of $E ( 2 ) \to B$ itself, and can then multiply by the appropriate 2-local unit. Finally, we use that B is compact, see also [Ada63 , Theorem 1.1 ] for a similar argument: This implies that the section $B \to E \otimes L^{s} ( Z ) ( 2 )$ factors as a section of $E \otimes L^{s} ( Z )$ followed by the 2-localisation map (which is a filtered colimit over multiplication by odd numbers) divided by an odd number $\alpha$ . The induced section of $E \otimes L^{n} ( Z )$ is then $\alpha$ times the canonical section. We may therefore multiply the section of $E \otimes L^{s} ( Z )$ with $\alpha$ and use that $\alpha 2 \equiv 1$ modulo 8 and that $L^{n}$ 0 ( Z ) is Z / 8 to obtain a lift of the fibrewise normal orientation as needed.

### 8. Corollary
For the spherical fibrations $\pi : E \to M$ constructed from $¯ x \in \pi ℓ$ (Bgl 1 ( S )) before the proof of Main Theorem, we have tso( $\pi$ ) $= 0$ provided the order n of ¯ x is odd.

Proof. By Theorem 7 , it suffices to show that the classifying map of $\pi$ , viewed as an element in BSG 0 ( M ), is of odd order. But by construction, this classifying map is in the image of the map BSG $0 ( M ( Z /n Z ,ℓ )) \to$ BSG 0 ( M ) and the source of this map is a finite group of odd order.

Universität Bielefeld, Fakultät für Mathematik, 33501 Bielefeld, Germany  
Email address: hebestreit@math.uni-bielefeld.de  

Email address: markus.land@math.lmu.de  

Universität Münster, Mathematisches Institut, 48149 Münster, Germany  
Email address: m.weiss@uni-muenster.de  

Email address: winges@math.lmu.de

