# HOMOLOGY MANIFOLDS AND EUCLIDEAN BUNDLES

FABIAN HEBESTREIT, MARKUS LAND, MICHAEL WEISS, AND CHRISTOPH WINGES

## Contents

- [Abstract](#abstract)
- [Preliminaries](#preliminaries)
- [Consequences](#consequences)
- [References](references/HLWW2024.md)

## Abstract

We construct a Poincaré complex whose periodic total surgery obstruction vanishes but whose Spivak normal fibration does not admit a reduction to a stable euclidean bundle. This contradicts the conjunction of two claims in the literature: Namely, on the one hand that a Poincaré complex with vanishing periodic total surgery obstruction is homotopy equivalent to a homology manifold, which appears in work of Bryant–Ferry–Mio–Weinberger, and on the other that the Spivak normal fibration of a homology manifold always admits a reduction to a stable euclidean bundle, which appears in work of Ferry–Pedersen.

In his celebrated work on algebraic surgery theory, Ranicki associates to an oriented Poincaré duality complex $X$ an invariant, the total surgery obstruction $\operatorname{tso}(X)$ of $X$, which for $\dim(X) \geq 5$ vanishes if and only if $X$ is realised by a closed, topological manifold [Ran79]. It encodes in a single invariant whether the Spivak normal fibration of $X$ admits a reduction to a stable euclidean bundle, and if so, whether any such reduction gives rise to a degree one normal map with trivial surgery obstruction. Through Siebenmann’s famous periodicity mistake and the consequent hunt for the missing manifolds, the question arose whether a similar total surgery obstruction for homology manifolds exists. This was finally established in [BFMW96] in terms of (what we shall refer to as) the periodic total surgery obstruction $\widetilde{\mathrm{tso}}(X)$ of $X$, a slightly coarser variant of Ranicki’s $\operatorname{tso}(X)$. Based on earlier work of Ferry and Pedersen [FP95] that the Spivak normal fibration of a homology manifold always admits a reduction to a stable euclidean bundle, they proved that $\widetilde{\mathrm{tso}}(X) = 0$ if and only if $X$ is realised by a homology manifold, and established a surgery exact sequence for homology manifolds.

The main goal of this note is to show that the results of [BFMW96] and [FP95] are incompatible by constructing Poincaré complexes $X$ with $\widetilde{\mathrm{tso}}(X) = 0$ but whose Spivak normal fibration do not admit reductions to euclidean bundles.

## Acknowledgements

The authors heartily thank Shmuel Weinberger for helpful discussions.

## Preliminaries

We will need the following facts surrounding the visible symmetric signatures and (periodic) total surgery obstructions of oriented Poincaré complexes. In this part, $X$ will usually refer to a general space, whereas $P$ refers to an oriented Poincaré complex.

(i) For a space $X$, we write $L^{\mathrm{vr}}(X) = L((D(\mathbb{Z})/X)_f, \Xi^{\mathrm{vr}}_\epsilon)$ for its visible quadratic (the case $r = \mathrm{q}$) and visible symmetric (the case $r = \mathrm{s}$) $L$-theory of Weiss and Ranicki, see [Ran92, Section 9] where the visible symmetric $L$-groups are denoted $VL^*(\mathbb{Z}, X)$

Date : June 24, 2024.

FH, MW and CW were supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG) through the collaborative research centres “Integral structures in Geometry and Representation theory” (grant no. TRR 358–491392403) at the University of Bielefeld, “Geometry: Deformations and Rigidity” (grant no. SFB 1442–427320536) at the University of Münster and “Higher invariants” (grant no. SFB 1085–224262486) at the University of Regensburg, respectively. MW is furthermore a member of the cluster “Mathematics Münster: Dynamics–Geometry–Structure” (grant no. EXC 2044–390685587) funded by the DFG at the University of Münster.

in case $X$ is represented by a finite simplicial complex and [CDH+23, Variant 4.4.15] for a general treatment. Here $(D(\mathbb{Z})/X)_f$ denotes the full subcategory of the compact objects $(D(\mathbb{Z})/X)^\omega$ of $D(\mathbb{Z})/X$ on finite objects, i.e. those whose $K$-theory class lies in the image of $K_0(\mathbb{Z}) \to K_0(\mathbb{Z}[\pi_1(X)]) \simeq K_0((D(\mathbb{Z})/X)^\omega)$ and $\epsilon$ denotes the trivial rank 0 spherical fibration over $X$ to align with notation from [CDH+23, CDH+20a]. The visible $L$-spectra are functorial in $X$; for a map $f : X \to Y$ we write $f_! : L^{\mathrm{vr}}(X) \to L^{\mathrm{vr}}(Y)$ for the induced map. We also have $\Xi^{\mathrm{vq}}_\epsilon = \Xi^q_\epsilon$, so that visible quadratic $L$-theory is simply quadratic $L$-theory. Moreover, the algebraic $\pi$-$\pi$-theorem says that for $X$ connected, the map $X \to B\pi_1(X)$ induces an isomorphism in visible quadratic $L$-theory, see [Ran92, Section 10] and [CDH+20b, Corollary 1.2.33]. The cofibre of the map $L^{\mathrm{vq}}(X) \to L^{\mathrm{vs}}(X)$ is denoted $L^{\mathrm{vn}}(X)$ and called the visible normal $L$-theory of $X$. In classical terminology, the choice of working with finite objects corresponds to choosing decoration “h” for the $L$-spectra.

- (ii) We have $L^q(*) = L^q(\mathbb{Z})$, $L^s(*) = L^s(\mathbb{Z})$, and $L^n(*) = L^n(\mathbb{Z})$, the usual quadratic, symmetric, and normal $L$-theory spectrum of the integers, the latter two of which are ring spectra. In fact, they are $E_\infty$-ring spectra, but this will not matter for the purposes of this paper. From $L^n_0(\mathbb{Z}) \simeq \mathbb{Z}/8\mathbb{Z}$ we see that $L^n(\mathbb{Z})[\frac{1}{2}] = 0$ so that the map $L^q(\mathbb{Z})[\frac{1}{2}] \to L^s(\mathbb{Z})[\frac{1}{2}]$ is an equivalence. Note also that $L^q(\mathbb{Z})$ does not refer to the $q$th symmetric $L$-group as it would in Ranicki’s notation.
- (iii) When $P$ is an oriented Poincaré complex of dimension $d$, there is a canonical point $\sigma^{\mathrm{vs}}(P)$ in $\Omega^d L^{\mathrm{vs}}(P)$, called the visible symmetric signature of $P$, see [Ran92, Example 9.13] and [CDH+23, Corollary 4.4.20]. Its image $\sigma^{\mathrm{vn}}(P)$ in $\Omega^d L^{\mathrm{vn}}(P)$ is called the visible normal signature of $P$. These data fit into the following commutative square whose left vertical arrow is the canonical forgetful map between oriented Poincaré bordism and oriented normal bordism [Ran79].

$$
\begin{CD}
\Omega^{SP}(X) @>>> L^{vs}(X) \\
@VVV @VVV \\
\Omega^{SN}(X) @>>> X \otimes \mathrm{MSG}
\end{CD}
$$

The upper horizontal map takes the (Poincaré bordism class of a) map $f : P \to X$ to $f_!(\sigma^{\mathrm{vs}}(P))$. In particular $\sigma^{\mathrm{vs}}(P)$ is the image of $[\mathrm{id}_P]$ in $\Omega^{\mathrm{SP}}_n(P)$, see [Ran92, Section 19]. Oriented normal bordism satisfies excision giving an equivalence $\Omega^{\mathrm{SN}}(X) \simeq X \otimes \mathrm{MSG}$, and the lower horizontal arrow for $X = *$ is called Ranicki’s normal orientation, while the top horizontal arrow is often referred to as the Sullivan–Ranicki orientation.

- (iv) For an oriented closed topological manifold $M$, we may view $[\mathrm{id}_M]$ as an element of $\Omega^{\mathrm{STop}}_n(M)$, the oriented bordism of topological manifolds. By topological transversality [KS77], $\Omega^{\mathrm{STop}}(X)$ is equivalent to $X \otimes \mathrm{MSTop}$ for any space $X$, showing that $\sigma^{\mathrm{vs}}(M)$ canonically lifts along the assembly map $M \otimes L^s(\mathbb{Z}) \to L^{\mathrm{vs}}(M)$ in this case.
- (v) To better incorporate the orientation behaviour of the above elements, one considers $L^n_{1/2}(\mathbb{Z}) = \mathbb{Z} \times_{\mathbb{Z}/8\mathbb{Z}} \tau_{\geq 0} L^n(\mathbb{Z})$, the 1/2-connective normal $L$-theory. We then obtain canonical maps $\mathrm{MSG} \to L^n_{1/2}(\mathbb{Z})$ as well as $\tau_{\geq 0} L^s(\mathbb{Z}) \to L^n_{1/2}(\mathbb{Z})$ lifting the normal orientation $\mathrm{MSG} \to L^n(\mathbb{Z})$ and the canonical projection $L^s(\mathbb{Z}) \to L^n(\mathbb{Z})$.

(vi) The assembly map in visible normal $L$-theory is an equivalence: $X \otimes L^n(\mathbb{Z}) \xrightarrow{\simeq} L^{\mathrm{vn}}(X)$, see [Ran92, Section 15]. We then denote by $L^{\mathrm{vs}}_{1/2}(X)$ the pullback of $L^{\mathrm{vs}}(X) \to L^{\mathrm{vn}}(X) \leftarrow X \otimes L^n_{1/2}(\mathbb{Z})$ and note that above square refines to the following square.

$$
\begin{CD}
\Omega^{SP}(X) @>>> L^{vs}_{1/2}(X) \\
@VVV @VVV \\
\Omega^{SN}(X) @>>> L^{vn}_{1/2}(X)
\end{CD}
$$

Hence, the visible symmetric signature $\sigma^{\mathrm{vs}}(P)$ canonically lifts to a point $\sigma^{\mathrm{vs}}_{1/2}(P)$ of $L^{\mathrm{vs}}_{1/2}(P)$. Its image $\sigma^{\mathrm{vn}}_{1/2}(P)$ in $L^{\mathrm{vn}}_{1/2}(P)$ is called the normal fundamental class of $P$.

- (vii) For a space $X$, we write $S^{\mathrm{d}}(X) = \mathrm{cofib}[X \otimes L^s(\mathbb{Z}) \to L^{\mathrm{vs}}(X)]$ for the cofibre of the assembly map and $S^{\mathrm{alg}}(X) = \mathrm{cofib}[X \otimes \tau_{\geq 0} L^{\mathrm{vs}}(\mathbb{Z}) \to L^{\mathrm{vs}}_{1/2}(X)]$. There is a canonical map $S^{\mathrm{alg}}(X) \to S^{\mathrm{d}}(X)$ induced by the maps $\tau_{\geq 0} L^s(\mathbb{Z}) \to L^s(\mathbb{Z})$ and $L^{\mathrm{vs}}_{1/2}(X) \to L^{\mathrm{vs}}(X)$.
- (viii) The image of $\sigma^{\mathrm{vs}}_{1/2}(P)$ under the canonical map $\Omega^d L^{\mathrm{vs}}_{1/2}(P) \to \Omega^d S^{\mathrm{alg}}(P)$ is denoted $\operatorname{tso}(P)$ and called the total surgery obstruction of $P$. By point (iv) above, $\operatorname{tso}(P)$ vanishes in case $P$ is homotopy equivalent to a closed topological manifold, and the main result of [Ran79] says that for $\dim(P) \geq 5$, the converse holds as well.

The image $\widetilde{\mathrm{tso}}(P)$ of $\operatorname{tso}(P)$ under the canonical map $\Omega^d S^{\mathrm{alg}}(P) \to \Omega^d S^{\mathrm{d}}(P)$, the periodic total surgery obstruction, is equally the image of $\sigma^{\mathrm{vs}}(P)$ under the canonical map $\Omega^d L^{\mathrm{vs}}(P) \to \Omega^d S^{\mathrm{alg}}(P)$. [BFMW96, Main theorem] says that for $\dim(P) \geq 6$, $\widetilde{\mathrm{tso}}(P)$ is a complete obstruction for $P$ being homotopy equivalent to a closed homology manifold. Our results below imply that in this generality, the argument given in loc. cit. is not applicable, see also [BFMW24].

(ix) As a consequence of the fact that visible normal $L$-theory is excisive and the above definitions, there are equivalences $S^{\mathrm{alg}}(X) \simeq \mathrm{cofib}[X \otimes L^q(\mathbb{Z}) \to L^{\mathrm{vq}}(X)]$ as well as $S^{\mathrm{alg}}(X) = \mathrm{cofib}[X \otimes \tau_{\geq 1} L^q(\mathbb{Z}) \to L^{\mathrm{vq}}(X)]$. Indeed, to see the latter, we note that there is the following commutative diagram

$$
\begin{aligned}
X \otimes \tau_{\geq 0} L^s(\mathbb{Z}) & \longrightarrow X \otimes L^n_{1/2}(\mathbb{Z}) \\
& \downarrow \\
L^{vs}(X) & \longrightarrow L^{vn}(X)
\end{aligned}
$$

whose induced map from the top left corner to the pullback is the canonical map $X \otimes \tau_{\geq 0} L^s(\mathbb{Z}) \to L^{\mathrm{vs}}_{1/2}(X)$. The claimed description of its cofibre then follows from the canonical equivalence $\tau_{\geq 1} L^q(\mathbb{Z}) \simeq \mathrm{fib}[\tau_{\geq 0} L^s(\mathbb{Z}) \to L^n_{1/2}(\mathbb{Z})]$.

(x) The image $\operatorname{ro}(P)$ of $\operatorname{tso}(P)$ under the boundary map $\Omega S^{\mathrm{d}}(P) \to \Omega^d[P \otimes \tau_{\geq 1} L^q(\mathbb{Z})]$, the reduction obstruction, is a complete obstruction for the Spivak normal fibration of $P$ to admit a reduction to a stable euclidean bundle [Ran79]. We denote by $\widetilde{\operatorname{ro}}(P)$ the image of $\operatorname{ro}(P)$ under the canonical map induced by $\tau_{\geq 1} L^q(\mathbb{Z}) \to L^q(\mathbb{Z})$. Note that $\widetilde{\operatorname{ro}}(P)$ is then also the image of $\widetilde{\mathrm{tso}}(P)$ under the boundary map $\Omega^d S^{\mathrm{alg}}(P) \to \Omega^{d-1}[P \otimes L^q(\mathbb{Z})]$.

(xi) Using the above, Ranicki [Ran79] shows that the space of paths from $\operatorname{tso}(P)$ to $0$ inside $\Omega^{\infty+d} S^{\mathrm{alg}}(P)$ is canonically equivalent to the topological manifold block structure space $\mathcal{S}(P)$. In particular, the topological block structure space $\mathcal{S}(M)$ of a topological manifold $M$ identifies canonically with $\Omega^{\infty+d+1} S^{\mathrm{alg}}(M)$. Likewise, [BFMW96] ought to give an identification of the homology manifold block structure space $\mathcal{S}^H(P)$ with the space of paths from $\operatorname{tso}(P)$ to $0$ inside $\Omega^{\infty+d} S^{\mathrm{alg}}(P)$.

Again, our results below imply that this last claim suffers from the defect indicated in point (viii): Even its consequence on $\pi_0$ currently relies on the existence of euclidean normal bundles for homology manifolds, see [BFMW24].

Before coming to our main results, the construction of certain Poincaré complexes, we prove the following positive result about the existence of euclidean reductions of Spivak normal fibrations of oriented Poincaré complexes.

**1. Proposition**

Let $X$ be an oriented $d$-dimensional Poincaré complex such that $\operatorname{ro}(X) = 0$. Then the following statements are equivalent:

- (i) The Spivak normal fibration of $X$ admits a reduction to a stable euclidean bundle,
- (ii) there exists a degree one map $M \to X$ where $M$ is an oriented closed topological manifold, and
- (iii) the fundamental class $[X] \in H_d(X; \mathbb{Z}[1/2])$ lifts to a fundamental class in $\operatorname{ko}_d(X)[1/2]$.

Proof. An argument of Sullivan’s shows that (i) implies that there exists a degree one normal map $M \to X$ for some closed topological manifold $M$, see [Wal99, Prop. 10.2] or [LM24, Theorem 7.19] for the smooth case. Using topological transversality [KS77] the same argument applies to the topological case. In particular, (i) implies (ii). Given (ii), we find that $[M \to X]$ determines an element of $\operatorname{MSTop}_d(X)$ which lifts the fundamental class $[X] \in H_d(X; \mathbb{Z})$. In particular, after inverting 2, one may use the Sullivan–Ranicki orientation $\operatorname{MSTop}[1/2] \to \tau_{\geq 0} L^s(\mathbb{Z})[1/2] \simeq \operatorname{ko}[1/2]$ to lift the fundamental class in $H_d(X; \mathbb{Z}[1/2])$ to $\operatorname{ko}_d(X)[1/2]$. See [LN18, Corollary 5.4 & following Remark] for an equivalence $L^s(\mathbb{Z})[1/2] \simeq \operatorname{KO}[1/2]$ of $E_\infty$ ring spectra and [LNS23, Section 8] for perspectives on the Sullivan–Ranicki orientation and general information about $\pi_0 \operatorname{Map}_{E_\infty}(\operatorname{MSTop}[1/2], \operatorname{ko}[1/2])$. 1 Finally, consider the exact sequence

$$
\pi_d(X \otimes L^q(\mathbb{Z})) \stackrel{(*)}{\longrightarrow} \pi_d(X \otimes \tau_{\leq 0} L^q(\mathbb{Z})) \to \pi_{d-1}(X \otimes \tau_{\geq 1} L^q(\mathbb{Z})) \to \pi_{d-1}(X \otimes L^q(\mathbb{Z}))
$$

and recall that the second to last group contains the element $\operatorname{ro}(X)$ which is sent to $\operatorname{ro}(X) = 0$ in the final group above. Note that the map labelled $(*)$ is 2-locally surjective, as follows from the 2-local splitting of $L^q(\mathbb{Z})$ into Eilenberg-Mac Lane spectra. Away from 2, we may use the equivalence $L^q(\mathbb{Z})[1/2] \simeq \operatorname{KO}[1/2]$ so that under assumption (iii) 2 the map $(*)[1/2]$ is also surjective, showing that $\operatorname{ro}(X) = 0$ and hence (i).

$\square$

We note that $\operatorname{ro}(X) = 0$ is implied by $\operatorname{tso}(X) = 0$, in which case the following also appears in [BFMW24].

**2. Corollary**

Let $X$ be an oriented Poincaré complex with $\operatorname{ro}(X) = 0$. If $\dim(X) \leq 6$, then the Spivak normal fibration admits a reduction to a stable euclidean bundle.

1 By a result of Sullivan’s [MM79, 5.12 & 5.24], one has $\operatorname{Map}_{E_\infty}(\operatorname{MSTop}[1/2], \operatorname{ko}[1/2]) \simeq \operatorname{Map}_{E_\infty}(\operatorname{MSO}[1/2], \operatorname{ko}[1/2])$. 2

Note that for $E$ any spectrum, the canonical map $\pi_d(X \otimes \tau_{\geq 0} E) \to \pi_d(X \otimes E)$ is an isomorphism.

Proof. It follows from work of Thom [Tho54] that any homology class of degree $\leq 6$ is represented by a smooth, in particular by a topological, closed manifold, so Proposition 1 (ii) is valid.

**3. Remark**

In the above argument, we have used that for an oriented Poincaré complex $X$, $\widetilde{\operatorname{ro}}(X) = 0$ implies that $\operatorname{ro}(X)$ vanishes 2-locally. One may wonder whether the same is true for the total surgery obstructions: If $\widetilde{\mathrm{tso}}(X) = 0$, does it follow that $\operatorname{tso}(X)$ vanishes 2-locally? We do not know the answer to this question currently. Note, however, that the 2-local splitting of $L^q(\mathbb{Z})$ does not induce a 2-local splitting of $S^{\mathrm{alg}}(X)$ into $S^{\mathrm{d}}(X)$ and a second summand: Indeed, suppose that $X$ is a $d$-dimensional aspherical Poincaré complex and $\pi_1(X)$ is a Farrell–Jones group. Then $S^{\mathrm{d}}(X) = 0$ but $S^{\mathrm{alg}}(X)_{(2)} \simeq [X \otimes \tau_{\leq 0} L^q(\mathbb{Z})]_{(2)} = 0$. Nevertheless, at least conjecturally, one has $\widetilde{\mathrm{tso}}(X) = 0$ whenever $X$ is aspherical, see [Lück24, Conjecture 9.178].

**Main Results**

We come to the main contribution of this paper.

Main Theorem. There exists an oriented Poincaré complex $E$ with $\widetilde{\mathrm{tso}}(E) = 0$ whose Spivak normal fibration does not admit a reduction to a euclidean bundle.

We consider the following construction. Let $\bar{x} \in \pi_\ell(\mathrm{Bgl}_1(\mathbb{S}))$ be an element of positive degree $\ell$ and order $n$. Let $M(\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}, \ell)$ be the corresponding mod $n$ Moore space in dimension $\ell$. By assumption, there is then a map $x : M(\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}, \ell) \to \mathrm{Bgl}_1(\mathbb{S})$ whose composite with the tautological map $\mathbb{S}^\ell \to M(\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}, \ell)$ is $\bar{x}$. By framed surgeries below the middle dimension, we may construct a map $f : M \to M(\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}, \ell)$ inducing an isomorphism on $\pi_\ell$ with $M$ a stably framed (smooth) $m$-manifold for any $m > 2\ell$; e.g. by framed surgery on an appropriately embedded $\ell$-sphere in $\mathbb{S}^\ell \times \mathbb{S}^{m-\ell}$. Let $k \geq \ell + 1$ be sufficiently large, so that $-xf : M \to \mathrm{Bgl}_1(\mathbb{S})$ lifts along $\mathrm{Baut}_*(\mathbb{S}^k) \to \mathrm{Bgl}_1(\mathbb{S})$ and let $\pi : E \to M$ be the associated pointed spherical fibration over $M$. By choice of $k$, the resulting map $E \to M(\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}, \ell)$ is then again an isomorphism on $\pi_\ell$. Moreover, $E$ is a Poincaré complex with Spivak normal fibration classified by the composite

$$
E \stackrel{\pi}{\rightarrow} M \stackrel{xf}{\longrightarrow} \{-d\} \times \mathrm{Bgl}_1(\mathbb{S}) \subseteq \mathrm{Pic}(\mathbb{S}),
$$

where $d = m + k$ is the dimension of $E$.

Proof of Main Theorem. Let $\bar{x} \in \pi_4(\mathrm{Bgl}_1(\mathbb{S})) \simeq \mathbb{Z}/24\mathbb{Z}$ be a generator of the 3-torsion and consider the Poincaré complex $E$ associated to $\bar{x}$ as constructed above. Then, the composite

$$
E \stackrel{\pi}{\rightarrow} M \stackrel{f}{\rightarrow} M(\mathbb{Z}/3\mathbb{Z}, 4) \stackrel{x}{\rightarrow} \mathrm{Bgl}_1(\mathbb{S})
$$

classifies the Spivak normal fibration of $E$ but does not lift along $\mathrm{BTop} \to \mathrm{Bgl}_1(\mathbb{S})$. Indeed, on $\pi_4$ it induces an inclusion $\mathbb{Z}/3\mathbb{Z} \subseteq \mathbb{Z}/24\mathbb{Z}$, which cannot factor through $\mathbb{Z} \oplus \mathbb{Z}/2 \simeq \pi_4(\mathrm{BTop})$ [Mil88, Lemma 9]. It then remains to show $\widetilde{\mathrm{tso}}(E) = 0$. To that end, note first that $E$ is simply connected. As a consequence of the $\pi$-$\pi$-theorem, we thus find that the map

$$
\Omega^d \overline{\mathcal{S}}^{\mathrm{alg}}(E) \rightarrow \Omega^{d-1}[E \otimes L^q(\mathbb{Z})]
$$

is split injective on homotopy groups. In particular, to verify that $\widetilde{\mathrm{tso}}(E) = 0$, it suffices to show that $\widetilde{\operatorname{ro}}(E) = 0$. To do so, recall that the composite $E \to M(\mathbb{Z}/3\mathbb{Z}, 4) \to \{-d\} \times \mathrm{Bgl}_1(\mathbb{S})$ is the Spivak normal fibration $DE$ of $E$. In particular, we obtain a map $\mathrm{Th}(DE) \to \Omega^d \mathrm{Th}(x)$, where $\mathrm{Th}(-)$ is the Thom spectrum functor. Applying Spanier–Whitehead duality

$$
\begin{aligned}
\pi_{-1}(D(\mathrm{Th}(x)) \otimes \tau_{\geq 1} L^q(\mathbb{Z})) & \longrightarrow \pi_{d-1}(E \otimes \tau_{\geq 1} L^q(\mathbb{Z})) \\
& \downarrow \\
\pi_{-1}(D(\mathrm{Th}(x)) \otimes L^q(\mathbb{Z})) & \longrightarrow \pi_{d-1}(E \otimes L^q(\mathbb{Z}))
\end{aligned}
$$

Now, the element $\operatorname{ro}(E)$ in the top right corner is in the image of the upper horizontal map, by naturality of Thom classes. The proof that $\operatorname{ro}(E)$, and hence $\widetilde{\mathrm{tso}}(E)$, vanishes is hence finished once we show that the left lower corner in the above diagram is trivial. To that end, one first computes that $D(\mathrm{Th}(x))$ is equivalent to $\mathrm{fib}(\mathbb{S} \xrightarrow{x} \mathbb{S}^{-4/3})$; generally the Thom spectrum of a map $\Sigma X \to \mathrm{Bgl}_1(\mathbb{S})$, for a pointed space $X$, identifies with the cofibre of the induced map $\Sigma^\infty X \to \mathbb{S}$, for example the argument in [Lan22, Section A.13] applies verbatim to general suspensions in place of spheres. Consequently, we obtain an exact sequence

$$
\pi_0(L^q(\mathbb{Z})) \stackrel{x}{\longrightarrow} \pi_4(L^q(\mathbb{Z})/3) \longrightarrow \pi_{-1}(D(\mathrm{Th}(x)) \otimes L^q(\mathbb{Z})) \to 0
$$

with first group isomorphic to $\mathbb{Z}$ and middle one isomorphic to $\mathbb{Z}/3\mathbb{Z}$. We claim that the map labelled $x$ in this sequence is surjective. To prove this, we may localise at 3, so that $L^q(\mathbb{Z})$ may be replaced by $\mathrm{KO}$, see again [LN18, Corollary 5.4] and the following remark. Then the claim follows from the fact that the map $\mathbb{S}/3 \to \mathrm{KO}/3$ induced by the unit of $\mathrm{KO}$ induces a bijection on $\pi_4$ [Ada66, Thm. 1.7]. 3

**4. Remark**

The above proof of Main Theorem works, essentially verbatim, more generally for any non-trivial element $\bar{x} \in \pi_{4k-1}(\mathbb{S})$ of odd order $n$ which is in the image of the J homomorphism. Indeed, one first observes that [Bru68, Theorem 4.7 & Remark 4.9], together with the equivalence $\mathrm{Top}/\mathrm{PL} \simeq K(\mathbb{Z}/2, 3)$ [KS77], says that the odd torsion of $\pi_{4k}(\mathrm{BTop})$ maps via the canonical map $\mathrm{BTop} \to \mathrm{Bgl}_1(\mathbb{S})$ isomorphically onto the kernel of Adams’ $e$ invariant. Since $e(\bar{x})$ is non-zero [Ada66, Theorem 1.5 & 1.6] we deduce that the Spivak normal fibration of the Poincaré complex $E$ constructed from $\bar{x}$ does not admit a reduction to a euclidean bundle. To see that $\widetilde{\mathrm{tso}}(E) = 0$, it again suffices to show that the composite

$$
\mathbb{S} \stackrel{x}{\rightarrow} \Omega^{4k}\mathbb{S}/n \rightarrow \Omega^{4k}\mathrm{KO}/n
$$

is surjective on $\pi_0$. To do this, one can reduce to the case where $n = p^l$ for some odd prime $p$. Then we use that the image of the J-homomorphism maps isomorphically onto $\pi_{4k-1}(L_{K(1)}\mathbb{S})$ and that the map $\pi_{4k}(\mathrm{KO}/n) \to \pi_{4k}(\mathrm{KU}/n)$ is an isomorphism. Doing this, it will suffice to show that the map

$$
\pi_{4k}(L_{K(1)}\mathbb{S}/n) \to \pi_{4k}(\mathrm{KU}/n),
$$

induced by the unit of $\mathrm{KU}$ and the fact that $\mathrm{KU}/n$ is $K(1)$-local, is an isomorphism. This follows from an inspection of the long exact sequence induced from the equivalence $L_{K(1)}\mathbb{S} \simeq (\mathrm{KU} \wedge p) \underset{h}{\mathbb{Z} \times p}$ together with the fact that $n$ divides the order of $\pi_{4k-1}(L_{K(1)}\mathbb{S})$. Concrete examples of elements $\bar{x}$ as needed are given by generators of the $p$-torsion of $\pi_{2p-3}(\mathbb{S})$ for any odd prime $p$. The case $p = 3$ is the one we used above.

3 This statement can equivalently be phrased as saying that $x$, thought of as a map $\Sigma^4 \mathbb{S}/3 \to \mathbb{S}/3$ is a $v_1$-map in the sense of chromatic homotopy theory, i.e. induces an isomorphism in $K$-theory.

## Consequences

Let us list a number of consequences of the above constructions.

- (i) Main Theorem invalidates an implicit assumption made in the proof of the main result of [BFMW96], as is explained also in the recent erratum [BFMW24] to loc. cit. If, however, [BFMW96, Main theorem] is correct as stated, then the Poincaré complexes $E$ constructed before the proof of Main Theorem are homotopy equivalent to closed homology manifolds whose Spivak normal fibrations do not admit reductions to stable euclidean bundles provided $\bar{x} \in \pi_\ell(\mathrm{Bgl}_1(\mathbb{S}))$ has odd order and is in the image of the J-homomorphism, see Remark 4. This would invalidate [FP95, Theorem 16.6].
- (ii) Weinberger informed us that he knows an argument that [BFMW96, Main Theorem] is correct as stated provided the Poincaré complex $X$ admits a $\pi$-$\pi$-2-patch structure. This addition would imply that our complexes are realised by closed homology manifolds, as we show in Proposition 5 below that the Poincaré complexes $E$ constructed above admit such a structure.
- (iii) Weinberger also informed us that he knows an argument that a certain family version of [BFMW96, Main theorem], see point (xi) above, is correct for families with typical fibre a topological manifold. We will show below that this implies that the fibrations $\pi : E \to M$ constructed before the proof of Main Theorem are fibre homotopy equivalent to block bundles with typical fibre a homology manifold provided $\bar{x} \in \pi_\ell(\mathrm{Bgl}_1(\mathbb{S}))$ has odd order, see Corollary 8. Again, it follows that $E$ is homotopy equivalent to a closed homology manifold. Moreover, if $\bar{x}$ does not lie in the kernel of Adams' $e$-invariant, then the Spivak normal fibration of $E$ does not admit a reduction to a euclidean bundle, see Remark 4.
- (iv) The discussion of Quinn’s resolution obstruction for homology manifolds in [BFMW96] also uses that the Spivak normal fibration admits a reduction to a euclidean bundle, and hence suffers the same defect as [BFMW96, Main Theorem].

**Patch Structures**

Let us recall that a $\pi$-$\pi$-2-patch structure on a Poincaré complex $X$ consists of two manifolds $M$ and $M'$ whose boundary inclusions $\partial M \subseteq M$ and $\partial M' \subseteq M'$ are equivalences on 1-truncations, and homotopy equivalences $\phi : \partial M \simeq \partial M'$ as well as $\psi : X \simeq M \cup_\phi M'$.

**5. Proposition**

The Poincaré complexes $E$ constructed above admit $\pi$-$\pi$-2-patch structures provided $\ell \geq 3$.

Proof. We note that $M(\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}, \ell) \simeq \Sigma M(\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}, \ell - 1)$ and consider a transverse inverse image $N \subseteq M$ of $M(\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}, \ell - 1)$ along $f : M \to M(\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}, \ell)$. By construction $N \subseteq M$ is a codimension one submanifold with trivial normal bundle. Since $M(\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}, \ell - 1)$ is simply connected, by ambient surgeries on $N$, one can achieve that $N$ is simply connected as well, see [Qui74] for general results along these lines. Consequently, $M \setminus N$ decomposes into a disjoint union of two pieces which are the interiors of compact manifolds $M_+$ and $M_-$ with common boundary $N$. Moreover, $M_\pm$ is again simply connected, so that the inclusion $N \subseteq M_\pm$ is an equivalence on 1-types. In other words, $M$ is obtained from two manifolds $M_+$ and $M_-$ by glueing along a diffeomorphism $\partial M_+ \simeq \partial M_-$. Moreover, the fibration classified by $M \to \mathrm{Baut}_*(\mathbb{S}^k)$ is trivial when restricted to $M_\pm$. It follows that $E$ is obtained from the two manifolds $M_+ \times \mathbb{S}^k$ and $M_- \times \mathbb{S}^k$ by glueing along a homotopy equivalence $\partial M_+ \times \mathbb{S}^k \simeq \partial M_- \times \mathbb{S}^k$, which is the promised $\pi$-$\pi$-2-patch structure on $E$.

- We recall that $M$ admits a canonical orientation in $L^n(\mathbb{Z})$-homology via the map $\mathrm{MSG} \to L^n(\mathbb{Z})$, i.e. a point $\sigma_n(M)$ in $\Omega^d[M \otimes L^n(\mathbb{Z})]$, capping with which induces Poincaré duality. Applying this construction fibrewise, we obtain a canonical section $\sigma_n(\pi)$ of the parametrised spectrum $\Omega^d[(E, B) \otimes_B L^n(\mathbb{Z})]$ of $L^n(\mathbb{Z})$-modules.
- Similarly, we may consider the parametrised spectrum $S^{\mathrm{alg}}(\pi)$ over $B$ sending a point $b \in B$ to $S^{\mathrm{alg}}(E_b)$. The periodic total surgery obstructions $\operatorname{tso}(E_b)$ of the fibres $E_b$ then assemble into a section $\operatorname{tso}(\pi)$ of $\Omega^d S^{\mathrm{alg}}(\pi)$.

We will now operate under the following.

Assumption. Given an oriented Poincaré fibration $\pi : E \to B$, with typical fibre $F$, then $\pi$ is fibre homotopy equivalent to a block bundle with typical fibre a homology manifold (homotopy equivalent to $F$) if and only if the just described section $\operatorname{tso}(\pi)$ vanishes.

As indicated above, when the typical fibre $F$ is a closed topological manifold, this follows from a family version of the results of [BFMW96], which Weinberger confirmed to us is valid. In particular, when $\operatorname{tso}(\pi)$ vanishes and $B$ is a manifold, $E$ is homotopy equivalent to a homology manifold.

**6. Lemma**

The following are equivalent for a pointed oriented Poincaré fibration $\pi : E \to B$ with simply connected fibres.

- (i) Giving a trivialisation of the fibrewise periodic total surgery obstruction $\operatorname{tso}(\pi)$, and
- (ii) giving a lift of the fibrewise normal orientation $\sigma_n(\pi)$ to a section of $\Omega^d[(E, B) \otimes_B L^s(\mathbb{Z})]$.

Proof. We consider the following diagram of $B$-parametrised spectra: (we write everywhere the value of these objects over a point $b$, and note that all constructions are functorial in $b$).

$$
\begin{CD}
(E_b, s(b)) \otimes L^q(\mathbb{Z}) @>>> L^{vq}(E_b, s(b)) \\
@VVV @VVV \\
(E_b, s(b)) \otimes L^s(\mathbb{Z}) @>>> L^{vs}(E_b, s(b)) @>>> \overline{\mathcal{S}}^{\mathrm{alg}}(E_b) \\
@VVV @VV{\simeq}V \\
(E_b, s(b)) \otimes L^n(\mathbb{Z}) @>{\simeq}>> L^{vn}(E_b, s(b))
\end{CD}
$$

The horizontal and vertical composites are each fibre sequences. This is because $S^{\mathrm{alg}}(E_b)$ is the cofibre of the assembly map in (visible) symmetric $L$-theory, which is, by construction, an equivalence on the basepoint $s(b)$. We then note that the algebraic $\pi$-$\pi$-theorem implies that the quadratic $L$-theory term on the very top vanishes as we assume $E_b$ to be simply connected. Moreover, we recall that the assembly map in visible normal $L$-theory is an equivalence. We therefore find the two indicated equivalences. Passing to spaces of sections we obtain similar fibre sequences and equivalences. Now, by construction, the canonical section of $b \mapsto (E_b, s(b)) \otimes L^n(\mathbb{Z})$ corresponds under the two indicated equivalences to the canonical section of $b \mapsto L^{vs}(E_b, s(b))$ taking the fibrewise symmetric signature of the bundle $E \to B$. Therefore, a lift of the left vertical map on spaces of sections is equivalent to the

**7. Theorem**

Let $\pi : E \to B$ be an oriented pointed spherical fibration with typical fibre homotopy equivalent to $\mathbb{S}^d$ whose associated element in $\mathrm{BSG}_0(B)$ is of odd order. Then there exists a trivialization of $\operatorname{tso}(\pi)$.

Proof. Recall that $\mathrm{BSG}$ and $\mathrm{Bsl}_1(\mathbb{S})$ denote the same infinite loop space. We will show that the data in (ii) of Lemma 6 can be given. First, we note that by classical orientation theory, the composite

$$
\mathrm{Bsl}_1(\mathbb{S}_{(2)}) \to \mathrm{Bgl}_1(\mathbb{S}_{(2)}) \to \mathrm{Bgl}_1(\mathrm{MSG}_{(2)})
$$

is canonically trivialised. More precisely, the null-homotopy is induced by the canonical nullhomotopy of the fibre sequence

$$
\mathrm{Bsl}_1(\mathbb{S}_{(2)}) \to \mathrm{Bgl}_1(\mathbb{S}_{(2)}) \to \mathrm{B}\mathbb{Z}_{(2)}^{\times}
$$

and a map $\mathrm{B}\mathbb{Z}_{(2)}^{\times} \to \mathrm{Bgl}_1(\mathrm{MSG}_{(2)})$. On endomorphism spaces, this latter map sends a 2-local unit $q$ to the self map of $\mathrm{MSG}_{(2)}$ which is given by multiplication with $q$.

Next, we note that the assumption that $\pi \in \mathrm{BSG}(B)$ is of odd order is equivalent to the statement that the composite

$$
B \rightarrow \mathrm{Bsl}_1(\mathbb{S}) \rightarrow \mathrm{Bsl}_1(\mathbb{S}_{(2)})
$$

is null homotopic, where the first map is the classifying map for the stable spherical fibration associated to $\pi : E \to B$. We therefore have two null-homotopies of the composite

$$
B \rightarrow \mathrm{Bsl}_1(\mathbb{S}) \rightarrow \mathrm{B}\mathbb{Z}_{(2)}^{\times}
$$

which together determine a map $B \to \mathbb{Z}_{(2)}^{\times}$. The composite

$$
B \rightarrow \mathrm{Bsl}_1(\mathbb{S}) \rightarrow \mathrm{Bsl}_1(\mathrm{MSG}) \rightarrow \mathrm{Bsl}_1(L^n(\mathbb{Z}))
$$

which induces the fibrewise normal orientation, i.e. the canonical section of the bundle $(E, B) \otimes_B L^n(\mathbb{Z})$ discussed above, is therefore also null-homotopic in two ways, whose difference is determined by the composite

$$
B \rightarrow \mathbb{Z}_{(2)}^{\times} \rightarrow \mathrm{gl}_1(\mathrm{MSG}_{(2)}) \rightarrow \mathrm{gl}_1(L^n(\mathbb{Z})).
$$

As a consequence, we find that we can lift the fibrewise normal orientation to a section of the bundle $E \otimes_B L^s(\mathbb{Z})_{(2)}$ simply because we can tautologically lift the section coming from the trivialisation of $E_{(2)} \to B$ itself, and can then multiply by the appropriate 2-local unit. Finally, we use that $B$ is compact, see also [Ada63, Theorem 1.1] for a similar argument: This implies that the section $B \to E \otimes_B L^s(\mathbb{Z})_{(2)}$ factors as a section of $E \otimes_B L^s(\mathbb{Z})$ followed by the 2-localisation map (which is a filtered colimit over multiplication by odd numbers) divided by an odd number $\alpha$. The induced section of $E \otimes_B L^n(\mathbb{Z})$ is then $\alpha$ times the canonical section. We may therefore multiply the section of $E \otimes_B L^s(\mathbb{Z})$ with $\alpha$ and use that $\alpha^2 \equiv 1$ modulo 8 and that $L^n_0(\mathbb{Z})$ is $\mathbb{Z}/8$ to obtain a lift of the fibrewise normal orientation as needed.

**8. Corollary**

For the spherical fibrations $\pi : E \to M$ constructed from $\bar{x} \in \pi_\ell(\mathrm{Bgl}_1(\mathbb{S}))$ before the proof of Main Theorem, we have $\widetilde{\mathrm{tso}}(\pi) = 0$ provided the order $n$ of $\bar{x}$ is odd.

Proof. By Theorem 7, it suffices to show that the classifying map of $\pi$, viewed as an element in $\mathrm{BSG}_0(M)$, is of odd order. But by construction, this classifying map is in the image of the map $\mathrm{BSG}_0(M(\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}, \ell)) \to \mathrm{BSG}_0(M)$ and the source of this map is a finite group of odd order.
